Arrival to Egypt
Exodus 1:1-8





Brothers, welcome to Day 1 of Exodus 90 2026.
It is our great joy to welcome you, no matter who you are or where you have come from, into the Exodus 90 brotherhood as we begin a new year. Our fraternity spans the globe. We are united in prayer and asceticism as we strive to live an uncommon way of life, one of freedom in Jesus Christ.
What is Exodus 90 really about? Exodus 90 exists to support men in becoming uncommonly free. Freedom, in a Catholic vision, is completely different from the freedoms the world offers us. The icon of manhood, the free man, is Jesus Christ. He shows us in his arms outstretched on the Cross what freedom looks like. The free man takes up his life and offers it generously for others according to the will of God. During Exodus 90, by the power of God’s grace working through ancient Catholic practices of prayer, asceticism, and fraternity, we will grow in personal freedom. The path in front of us is long and at times challenging. But the promise we make to all Exodus men is that if you commit to the adventure, strive to get back up when you fall, rely upon your brothers for support, and refuse to give in to any kind of discouragement, you will become more like the man you were created to be. We’ve watched it happen tens of thousands of times in the faces of the men who have come before you.
Our spiritual guides this year will be Jamie Baxter, Bishop Erik Varden, and Fr. Boniface Hicks. Jamie Baxter, the founder of Exodus 90, will be leading our daily reflections through the Book of Exodus. Bishop Erik Varden, the Bishop of Trondheim in Norway and a prolific author and speaker, will deliver our opening Sunday homily this coming Sunday, January 11th. Fr. Boniface Hicks, a renowned spiritual director, author, and speaker from St. Vincent Archabbey in Latrobe, Pennsylvania, will close us in prayer and offer his blessing each day of the journey. He will also preach the remaining Sunday homilies throughout the journey to Easter Sunday.
Every day, we begin our time together with a moment of prayer, in which we offer to the Lord ourselves, our families, our fraternities, and also all Exodus men from around the world. Our encouragement to you is to enter in, pray for the brotherhood, and rely upon the prayers of men from all around the world who are praying for you too.
Welcome to Exodus 90 2026.
Welcome to the brotherhood.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Prayerfully entrust your Exodus journey to him today. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
These are the names of the sons of Israel who came to Egypt with Jacob, each with his household: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin, Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher. The total number of people born to Jacob was seventy. Joseph was already in Egypt. Then Joseph died, and all his brothers, and that whole generation. But the Israelites were fruitful and prolific; they multiplied and grew exceedingly strong, so that the land was filled with them. Now a new king arose over Egypt, who did not know Joseph.
Reflection
The Book of Exodus is a story of freedom, of how one people, the Hebrews, were delivered by God out of slavery in Egypt. Exodus continues the story of Genesis, that book of origins that narrates the story of creation, the Fall of our first parents into sin, the call of our father Abraham, and the growth of his family, the beginning of his descendants who would be as numerous as the stars.
Names matter in the Bible, and the names we read today tell a surprising and dark story. The opening verses of Exodus remind us how Israel, God’s chosen people, arrived in Egypt in the first place. Our Scripture today references an unnamed king, who, though he rose to high power, “did not know Joseph.” Joseph’s name stands starkly against the anonymity of the ruler. All we know about the king is that he did not know Joseph.
Who is this Joseph? His story situates us in Egypt, showing us that God has a plan for allowing our struggles precisely to use them to bring us to freedom. Joseph’s story, however, begins back in Canaan, the Promised Land. Abraham was the father of Isaac, and Isaac the father of Jacob. Jacob had twelve sons, who are the ones recounted in the opening verses. Genesis tells us that Jacob loved his son Joseph especially, “because he was the son of his old age.” He made for him a long-sleeved, multi-colored robe, a raiment to reflect his love.
Joseph was a dreamer. In one of his dreams, the sun, the moon, and eleven stars bowed down to him. His family understood themselves to be reverencing Joseph in his dream, much to the envy of his brothers, and the confusion of his father, who stored the dream in his memory.
His brothers had had enough. One day, while the eleven were shepherding the flocks of their father, Joseph approached from afar. Seeing “this dreamer” from a distance, they conspired to do away with him. Eleven on one, they tore his robe, and cast him into a pit without water to drink. As they dined above him, a caravan of traders approached. Rather than leave him for dead, the brothers sold him at a profit, exchanging their brother for twenty pieces of silver. They took Joseph to Egypt as a slave.
Against all odds, Joseph became a great man in Egypt. By interpreting the meaning of Pharaoh’s dreams, Joseph saw that a seven-year famine was to come after seven years of plenty. While times were still good, under the stewardship of Joseph’s counsel, Egypt stored up enough for themselves to survive. “When all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread; and Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians, ‘Go to Joseph; what he says to you, do.’ … all the earth came to Egypt to Joseph to buy grain, because the famine was severe over all the earth.” (Genesis 41:56-67)
His brothers, who had betrayed him years before, came to him for help. Fearing his wrath, they fell down before him and promised to become his slaves. Joseph answers the wish of his father and forgives them, saying, “Fear not, for am I in the place of God? As for you, you mean evil against me; but God meant it for good, to bring it about that many people should be kept alive, as they are today” (Genesis 50:19-20). The people of Israel arrived in Egypt four hundred years before the Exodus through the sin and betrayal of blood brothers. And though Joseph’s family had sinned against him, God brought his family into Egypt as a mercy, to provide for them in their time of need, to restore their relationships, and to work even greater wonders for the people of Israel.
Today, we too are in Egypt. Like the Israelites, we need liberation from many things that hold us bound in a kind of moral or spiritual slavery. As linear and as perfect as we would like the story of our lives to be, and as we often project them to be to others, they’re not. We all come from genealogies with stories of our own, our existence being tied up and dependent upon those who have come before us. And our own lives are full of things we wish were different, and perhaps that we would change if we could. Pride. Betrayal. Trauma. Abandonment. Neglect. Disparagement. Failed relationship. Death. Our lives are marked by sin, sins we commit, and sins committed against us.
And yet, God is up to something good. Like in the days of old, if we persevere in the love of God, as St. Paul reminds us, he works through everything to bring about our growth for the divine purpose he has assigned to us. He is calling us to make our own Exodus over the next ninety days, breaking out of the bonds of bad habits and failed opportunities and into a deeper relationship with him.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, you gave us Joseph as an example who can identify with our suffering and also gives us a reason for hope in seeing how you delivered him. What his brothers meant for ill, you meant for good. Help us to have that hope as we bring all of our own woundedness into this Exodus 90. Help us to trust in the power of your providence. We ask all this through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

Fruitfulness
Exodus 1:8-14





Brothers, welcome to Day 2 of Exodus 90.
We want to welcome all the new men who have joined us today. It’s great to have you, and welcome to a brotherhood of men who are striving for holiness in Christ.
Before we begin with prayer today, we want to share our theme for this year’s Exodus and encourage you to define your intention for the journey. We call this intention our “why.”
Our new theme for Exodus 90 this year is “I will be with you,” which is taken from the twelfth verse of the third chapter of the Book of Exodus. These words are spoken by the Lord to Moses at the burning bush, when the Lord calls him from the life of a shepherd to become the great liberator of his people. These words are assurances and consolations spoken to overcome Moses’s many self-doubts about his inadequacies to lead God’s people. Throughout our adventure and through our practices of prayer and asceticism, with the support of our local fraternities, we will come to experience and rely on the presence of the Lord—who promises to be with us—in a new way this year.
As we begin our journey, it’s important to articulate a “why.” A personal why statement is the intention that motivates your Exodus. Viktor Frankl, in his seminal book Man’s Search for Meaning, writes that “those who have a ‘why’ can bear almost any ‘how.’” Reflect upon where you need to grow in freedom, and who will benefit from your transformation. Write your why, and share it with your brothers in your first fraternity meeting. Hold your “why” close to your heart, especially the people for whom you are offering your journey, and raise it before the Lord in your daily prayers to bless. It’s completely normal to refine your why as you go, and to come to the end of Exodus 90 with an idea in mind, and for the Lord to have another why in mind that you needed far more. What matters is that we are intentional with our prayers and sacrifices, never doing them just because, but instead offering them in the name of Christ.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Bring your afflictions before the Lord today that he may heal them. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Now there arose a new king over Egypt, who did not know Joseph. And he said to his people, “Behold, the sons of Israel are too many and too mighty for us. Come, let us deal shrewdly with them, lest they multiply, and, if war befall us, they join our enemies and fight against us and escape from the land.” Therefore they set taskmasters over them to afflict them with heavy burdens; and they built for Pharaoh store-cities, Pithom and Raamses. But the more they were oppressed, the more they multiplied and the more they spread abroad. And the Egyptians were in dread of the sons of Israel. So they made the sons of Israel serve with rigor, and made their lives bitter with hard service, in mortar and brick, and in all kinds of work in the field; in all their work they made them serve with rigor.
Reflection
We do not undertake this greater Exodus journey in isolation. As part of God’s people, we are inserted into an immense, 400-year struggle at the beginning of the Book of Exodus and extending throughout salvation history.
With the memory of Joseph’s greatness forgotten by Pharaoh, the once-favored place of the people of Israel slowly gives way to oppression. The work to which they were subject was important work on which Egypt had come to depend: building up store-cities, which were places of food storage and military armory.
We sense two echoes of the Book of Genesis reverberating in Pharaoh’s concern and conduct.
From the very beginning, on the sixth day of creation, God made man in his image. Man is unique among all creation—a presence stamped by God with the potential to become like him. Sensing his incompletion, God draws the woman from the side of the man to make him whole. In the communion of man and woman, intended and blessed by God from the beginning, we encounter the fruitfulness for which we were created: “Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth and subdue it” (Genesis 1:28).
The second echo of Genesis is from God’s promise to Abraham. When he calls him to become the Father of God’s nation, he tells the childless man that he will become a father to descendants beyond the number of the stars. He believes him with sincerity and courage, hoping against hope in God’s promise even though it seemed impossible. And then God warns him: “Know of a surety, that your descendants will be sojourners in a land that is not theirs, and will be slaves there, and they will be oppressed for four hundred years, but I will bring judgment on the nation which they serve, and afterward they shall come out with great possessions” (Genesis 15:13–14).
The devil, however, hates fruitfulness, which is why he deceived Eve and seeks to oppress the descendants of Abraham in Egypt. Nonetheless, we see the result of the fruitfulness of God’s people in today’s passage, which is the cause of Pharaoh’s concern. Since they arrived in Egypt hundreds of years before, the Israelites have grown from a small tribe into a mighty people. Pharaoh is threatened by the fruitfulness of Israel, and he lives in fear that they will join Egypt’s enemies in war against them. He appoints taskmasters to “afflict them with heavy burdens” to thwart their growth. By this action, he fulfills God’s word to Abraham. Unfortunately for Pharaoh, and rather counterintuitively, “the more [the people of Israel] were oppressed, the more they multiplied and the more they spread abroad.”
Our opponent is much more powerful than a nameless Pharaoh-man. Inspired by Scripture, the Church teaches us that we have three enemies: the world, the flesh, and the devil. St. Paul reflects upon them in his letter to the Ephesians, saying that we “once walked, following the course of this world, following the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience. Among these we all once lived in the passions of our flesh, following the desires of body and mind, and so we were by nature children of wrath, like the rest of mankind” (Ephesians 2:2-3).
The world, the flesh, and the devil are the enemies of the sons of God. They are our enemies.
It’s completely normal for us to become distracted by the empty promises of the world for status and wealth. To become discouraged by the weaknesses of our flesh from unbalanced food, drink, and sex. And to fall into confusion, by the trials that test us and the temptations of our enemy who works against us.
If today you are distracted, discouraged, or confused, know that you have been found. Our Lord Jesus Christ—God who became a man—who fulfills the Exodus in his victory over the world, the flesh, and the devil, extends his hand to you. Our enemies fear who we have been called to become in Christ, and of what we are capable of accomplishing with his grace. Just like Israel, we are not bound because we are weak. No, brothers, we are strong and called to bear fruit beyond the number of the stars into eternal life.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, in this place, we find ourselves distracted, discouraged, confused, affronted, oppressed, and sometimes tempted to think we are less than the men you have made us to be. Help us to see again the tremendous fruitfulness that you anticipate from our lives and that you help to provide for us. Help us to recover the greatness that you see in us, a greatness that comes directly from your love because you have chosen us. Like your people in Egypt, you have chosen us, and you want us to be free. Help us to live in that fruitfulness and freedom throughout this day. We ask this through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Pharaoh’s Attack
Exodus 1:15-22





Brothers, welcome to Day 3 of Exodus 90.
We have thousands of men who have joined the journey towards freedom in Christ this week. Welcome to the brotherhood!
Today is a Wednesday, and so, like all Wednesdays and Fridays during Exodus 90, we fast and abstain from meat today. We follow the fasting guidelines offered by the Church for Ash Wednesday and Good Friday, in which we eat one full meal and two small meals while abstaining from meat and not eating between meals. Though forgotten in our time, early Christians fasted every Wednesday in remembrance that Judas betrayed Jesus to the chief priests on the Wednesday before his Crucifixion.
We also want to take a moment to talk about Christian manhood. The world offers all kinds of definitions for what it means to be a man. Even within the world of the Church, we are presented with images of manhood, many of which are reductions of the truth. We are not here to tell you how to be a man, nor to threaten you to be a man or else. Rather, what we are doing here is constructing our lives to encounter the icon of manhood, the perfect man, who is Jesus Christ. In Christ alone, will we find the new man we were created to be.
From the beginning, our relationships with God, our neighbor, and even with ourselves were ruptured by the Fall. Christ came to save us, and through the waters of baptism, he cleanses us of the original sin we carry. The effects of sin remain, as does our propensity to sin, which the Church calls concupiscence. One of the consequences of the Fall was the disharmony that was introduced into the relationship between men and women. We see it obviously manifest in sins of lust, but also in the manipulation and distrust we see, and unfortunately, can experience. But this tension between man and woman was not how we were designed by God, nor the vision that Christ came to teach, or that the Church reminds us of in our own day. Upon creation, man alone was incomplete. Adam sensed this deeply. Eve was drawn forth from his side in order to complete him, to make him whole, and together they were to become fruitful: to fill the earth and subdue it. Men and women are complementary, in themselves insufficient, living in need of communion with one another.
It’s important to recall these truths as we journey together over the coming days as a brotherhood of men around the world. For single men, take these days as an opportunity to prepare for the fatherhood to which you are called, whether as a layman or as a priest or religious. For married men, bring your spouse into the experience as she would like, communicate what it entails, and check in with her throughout the adventure. It’s important to have her support, and if you need to make adaptations for your marriage and family life, please do so.
As we grow into the full stature of the men we are created to be, we become men for others. The freedom of Christ always bears the fruit of commitment, sacrifice, and love. Christ is the icon of manhood. Let’s keep our eyes fixed on him.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Turn to the Lord to protect your life with his saving grace today. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Then the king of Egypt said to the Hebrew midwives, one of whom was named Shiphrah and the other Puah, “When you serve as midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them upon the birth-stool, if it is a son, you shall kill him; but if it is a daughter, she shall live.” But the midwives feared God, and did not do as the king of Egypt commanded them, but let the male children live. So the king of Egypt called the midwives, and said to them, “Why have you done this, and let the male children live?” The midwives said to Pharaoh, “Because the Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women; for they are vigorous and are delivered before the midwife comes to them.” So God dealt well with the midwives; and the people multiplied and grew very strong. And because the midwives feared God he gave them families. Then Pharaoh commanded all his people, “Every son that is born to the Hebrews you shall cast into the Nile, but you shall let every daughter live.”
Reflection
God extends his life to us in the midst of our burdens, but to accept it, we must face opposition from the enemy. If taskmasters and heavy burdens are not enough to stop the growth of the people of Israel, the king of Egypt is prepared to go further. Rather than humble himself or win the loyalty of the Israelites through generosity, he takes life and death into his own hands.
Psalm 18, one of King David’s songs, reads: “You are loving with those who love you: you show yourself perfect with the perfect. With the sincere you show yourself sincere, but the cunning you outdo in cunning. For you save a humble people but humble the eyes that are proud.” Through the courage of the midwives, Shiphrah and Puah, God outdoes Pharaoh’s cunning. Infant mortality rates were high in ancient Egypt, and the midwives may have gotten away with the commanded crime for a time without arousing too much attention. Instead of putting the Hebrew boys to death, however, the midwives risk their lives, fearing God, and following their own God-given lights. It’s striking that we know the names of two midwives who lived some 3,500 years ago, while it remains a long-standing debate of scholars to this day as to the identity of the Pharaoh who reigned during the time of the Exodus. Because of their fidelity, God blessed them with families of their own, and God’s people continued to multiply.
To stop the people of Israel, Pharaoh heaps more work and heavier burdens upon the backs of the Israelite men. And then he resolves to kill their boys. Pharaoh’s attack has been witnessed in the modern world: to enslave and tear down a people, thwart the men.
Why? Men are entrusted with human and spiritual authority by God for the good of others. Manhood is fulfilled in fatherhood. A Christian man is called to manifest the steadfast love and faithfulness of God, who in Christ is revealed to be a Father. We fulfill our purpose when we participate in the fatherhood to which we are called and become effective bridges to God the Father through our presence, words, and example. This is why the influence of a good man is impossible to measure in this life and echoes throughout generations and into eternity.
Pharaoh heaps more work upon the men in order to burden them, asking for the same output of bricks but without providing the straw for the task. Work is an important part of human life where we have the opportunity to co-create with God, who is the Creator. Through our work, we exercise the gifts we have been given and the skills we have acquired. If we are working with the mind of the Church, what we do should be oriented to the common good, to the benefit of our neighbors.
The workplace presents many opportunities to share our faith with others and to grow in virtue. It also presents many temptations for us to overcome. The mentality of the world about work is rife with pitfalls. As we begin our Exodus, it is worth reflecting on whether or not we find ourselves in a similar scheme as the one designed by Pharaoh to burden the men of Israel. Are we so consumed with our work that our desire to provide for our families has led us to an endless pursuit of more: more money, more possessions, or more status?
May the examples of Shiphrah and Puah help us to remember that no matter how average and unexceptional we may seem to the world or even to ourselves, and no matter how ordinary our daily work may be, a task has been entrusted to us that has not been entrusted to any other man in the world. If we answer it, our names will be preserved where it matters in the heavens, as the world and its glory fade back into dust. And those who follow after us will grow in strength and in number, inspired by our example.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, you see the authority that you have given to us as men: authority to serve, to guide, to help, to support. Help us to be sensitive to the assaults on human dignity and the threats towards the innocent ones. Help us to have the courage of Shiphra and Pua to go against the prevailing violence and to use our power to protect and serve. Strengthen our hearts to be strong and good men for you today. We ask this through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Give Up to Receive
Exodus 2:1-10





Brothers, welcome to Day 4 of Exodus 90.
Before we begin our prayer today, we would like to share about the Desert Fathers, which was an incredible movement in the Early Church, and who inspire our approach with Exodus 90.
The Desert Fathers lived in the fourth and fifth centuries, a few hundred years after Christ. The movement began about the time when Christianity was legalized, and it was no longer a crime to bear the name of Christian. Many in high places were becoming Christians for the first time, including the Emperor Constantine himself. As the threat of martyrdom declined, the threat of worldliness emerged for the faith for the first time.
Inspired by the example of St. Anthony the Great, men and women fled to the desert, compelled by the Holy Spirit to live lives of radical prayer and asceticism with the support of small communities in the deserts of Egypt, a fitting place for us as we make our Exodus. A small book has been passed down through the ages called the Sayings of the Desert Fathers, which preserves the wisdom that these human and spiritual masters won in their pursuit of holiness. The sayings are simple yet powerful, surprising, and always challenging.
Here’s a saying from St. Anthony that illustrates the heart of the spirituality of the desert that we want to cultivate in our fraternities: “Anthony once said: Our life and our death is with our neighbor. If we win our brother, we win God. If we cause our brother to stumble, we have sinned against Christ.” Competition in the Desert was not for praise or recognition from others or to prove anything to themselves or anyone else. It was to help connect one another to God and to take the summons of Christ seriously, venturing further and further with him into holiness.
Here’s another saying that illustrates the stunning vulnerability of the desert tradition from the life of St. Macarius, who was once described “like a god who walked on earth” because of his way of life. Abba Macarius met a young monk who was known to be completely full of himself and proud of his asceticism. When he was alone with him, Macarius asked the young monk, “How are things going with you?” The young monk replied, “Thanks to your prayers, all is well.” The old man asked, “Do you not have to battle with your fantasies?” The young monk answered, “No, up to now all is well.” He was afraid to admit anything (the saying goes). But the old man said to him, “I have lived for many years as an ascetic, and everyone sings my praises, but despite my age, I still have trouble with sexual fantasies.” The young monk said, “Well, it is the same with me, to tell the truth.” And the old man went on admitting, one by one, all the other fantasies that caused him to struggle, until he had brought the young monk to admit all of them himself.” The way of the Desert was through humility, vulnerability, and encouragement. That’s the spirit we strive to maintain in our fraternities.
Despite all of the promises of social connection that we are offered by the world today, we are left isolated from one another. It’s entirely possible to live a functioning Catholic life and to be known by no one. When we are isolated, we are so susceptible to the snares of the world, the lusts of our flesh, and the empty show of the devil. Christianity is not self-help; it’s a community drawn by and gathered around our Lord.
Exodus 90 fraternities are designed to be sacred places for men. They are one of the few places in the world that we can be honest about who we are, what we are struggling with, and how we believe the Lord is working in our lives. Your fraternity is an opportunity to step out of the darkness and loneliness of our time, and into the freedom of the light. In addition to your weekly meetings, it’s important to find an anchor, which is another man from the fraternity that we can check in with briefly each day. It may take a few weeks to build up trust with the men of your fraternity, and that’s completely normal. As men, we find ourselves in brotherhood as we pursue shared goals, not merely wanting to be friends. As we continue to make progress on our adventure, you will begin to experience the brotherhood form. We’ve crafted a weekly meeting guide that can help jump-start your conversations if needed, but what matters is that each man has a few minutes to share where they are. Conversations that focus on the disciplines of Exodus 90 are shallow. Please keep your fraternity meetings confidential unless there is a grave reason, including self-harm or threats to the common good.
Remember St. Anthony and St. Macarius as we go into our fraternity meetings. Strive to win your brother for Christ through humility, vulnerability, and encouragement. If you do, you will gain God.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Let go of your attachments today to receive all the Lord wants to give you. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Now a man from the house of Levi went and took to wife a daughter of Levi. The woman conceived and bore a son; and when she saw that he was a goodly child, she hid him three months. And when she could hide him no longer she took for him a basket made of bulrushes, and daubed it with bitumen and pitch; and she put the child in it and placed it among the reeds at the river’s brink. And his sister stood at a distance, to know what would be done to him. Now the daughter of Pharaoh came down to bathe at the river, and her maidens walked beside the river; she saw the basket among the reeds and sent her maid to fetch it. When she opened it she saw the child; and behold, the baby was crying. She took pity on him and said, “This is one of the Hebrews’ children.” Then his sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter, “Shall I go and call you a nurse from the Hebrew women to nurse the child for you?” And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Go.” So the girl went and called the child’s mother. And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Take this child away, and nurse him for me, and I will give you your wages.” So the woman took the child and nursed him. And the child grew, and she brought him to Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son; and she named him Moses, for she said, “Because I drew him out of the water.”
Reflection
God works in mysterious ways. He often brings about his greatest triumphs through moments of defeat or desperation. As we begin the second chapter of the Book of Exodus, we encounter the birth and youth of Moses in the most difficult of circumstances.
The protagonist of our story, Moses, who will become the friend of God and the liberator of the people of Israel, was born into a time of suffering. Pharaoh had ordered the death of all Israelite boys.
The Bible is God’s divinely inspired Word. The Old Testament foreshadows the New Testament, which means it anticipates and prepares the way for Jesus Christ. Jesus said, “Do not think that I have come to abolish the law or the prophets; I have come not to abolish but to fulfill.” This is why reading the Old Testament is so important. Every word of the Old Testament is an encounter with the Word made flesh in Christ, and it leads us into a deeper understanding of and relationship with him.
The circumstances surrounding Moses’s birth anticipate the sufferings into which Christ was born 1,500 years later, when the male children of Israel were to be executed once again, this time by King Herod. Sources from the Eastern Church, including the Byzantine Liturgy, say that more than ten thousand boys died during this dark decree when Christ was born. We commemorate the sacrifice of their lives every year as the feast of the Holy Innocents shortly after we celebrate Christmas each year on December 28.
Because of the threat of death and by the inspiration of an angel in a dream, Joseph and Mary fled to Egypt for a few of the hidden years of which we know very little. This detail, that Joseph, Mary, and Jesus spent time in Egypt, is often unremembered. They sought safety in a place of slavery for their ancestors, from which they had been mightily delivered in the story we are reading.
As we consider our own bondage, from which we hope for greater freedom during our Exodus, let’s remember the presence of the Holy Family. They fled to Egypt, they saw its ruins, and remembered its significance for their people. We are not alone in Egypt. Our Blessed Mother Mary and St. Joseph know the places into which we fall; they see the wreckage sin leaves in the wake of our lives. They come to our aid in Egypt to intercede for us and to encourage us on our journey to freedom.
The Exodus story is all about God’s providential care for his people. Moses is the prime example of how God draws his people out of danger. His parents made a basket and entrusted him to the Providence of God at the river’s edge, hoping for his safety. Moses’s sister Miriam intervenes with the life and death of her baby brother in the balance as Pharaoh’s daughter notices him. She asks: “Shall I go and call a nurse from the Hebrew women to nurse the child for you?” The princess says, “Go.” Moses’s mother is offered wages to nurse her own son to life before entering the royal household for the remainder of his youth as an adopted son.
Moses’s family surrenders their newborn son, and through the providence of God, he is returned to them for a time. Fathers, can you even imagine handing over the life of one of your children, out of desperation to save them, only to have them returned to you? What a relief that would be. This dynamic of letting go, of offering and then receiving back in a new way, is common in the spiritual life. When we make sacrifices, we often find that what we feared to give up is returned to us a hundredfold in different ways, as God decides according to our needs, which are often unknown to us. As we begin to make sacrifices on our journey through our practices of prayer, asceticism, and fraternity, let’s hopefully expect without presumption and look out for blessings and favors to come back to us in return.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, you never cease surprising us in your fidelity to us. You are never outdone in generosity. Inspire us to make sacrifices today, letting go even of that which is precious to us, trusting that you will provide so much in return. Give us the courage to trust you more as you lead us through the pathways of this life. Help us to be like Moses’s parents, ready to lay down even precious gifts, ready to take them up again. We ask this through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Royalty Squandered
Exodus 2:11-25





Brothers, welcome to Day 5 of Exodus 90.
Before we begin with our prayer today, let’s remember that today is a fast day. We follow the fasting guidelines offered by the Church, in which we eat two small meals and one large meal and abstain from meat. On every Friday throughout the year, but especially during Exodus 90, we remember Jesus’s passion and death for us on the Cross.
We would like to share a few words about asceticism as we are getting started in our first week. Asceticism comes from a Greek word, askesis, which means training. And that’s a helpful definition to help properly shape our understanding of the disciplines that we are taking up. When we practice asceticism, we say “no” for a time to the common comforts we typically enjoy. Why? Because, like athletes who train for sport, we need to train for our own lives and the purposes the Lord entrusts uniquely to us.
When we practice asceticism, we are training for the big moments in which others are counting on us to step up, lead, and manifest the love of God. These moments can be joyful, like preparing for the reception of sacraments, perhaps especially marriage or ordination. But we are also training for the future sufferings that will inevitably come our way in the course of our lives: sickness, tragedy, and death. When we practice asceticism, we are training to be ready for these moments.
We see the ascetic life modeled from the early Church through the lives of the saints in our own day. St. Seraphim was a modern-day Desert Father who lived as a hermit and ascetic in Russia in the nineteenth century. One day, a troubled young man approached St. Seraphim. The young man practiced the sacraments, prayed, and practiced asceticism, but he was discouraged. He felt like he would never live up to the call of Christ to become a saint.
St. Seraphim greeted him as he always greeted every person. “My joy,” he said. And then St. Seraphim responded to the burdens that the young man was carrying, though he hadn’t said a word:
“I, poor Seraphim, shall now explain to you in what this goal truly consists. Prayer, fasting, vigils, and other excellent Christian practices, however good in themselves, do not constitute the goal of the Christian life, though they are indispensable means for its attainment. The true goal of Christian life is the acquisition of the Holy Spirit of God. Fasting, prayer, alms, and every good work done for the sake of Christ are but means to an end. And take careful note of this, good Father: only a good deed performed in the name of Christ brings the fruit of the Holy Spirit.”
Asceticism is not about doing hard things because they are hard, or to prove something to ourselves or to others. Rather, asceticism clears space within our souls and hearts to receive the Holy Spirit, to come and dwell within us in his time.
If Exodus 90 is for you, and there is no pressure from someone else to persuade or convince you, we encourage you to strive for the ideals set before you. At the same time, we want you to know that there is no such thing as a perfect Exodus. The journey to the Promised Land was far from a straight shot for the Israelites, and the same is true for us. Some days will go well, and others will not. That’s how the process works, and that’s how life works. When we fall short, let’s surrender more fully to the Lord, ask for his grace, and rely on our brothers for support. Discouragement has no place in our brotherhood; there is no such thing as failing Exodus. You have so much to be proud of in seeking to grow in personal freedom for your own mission. We are proud of you.
A few practical notes and disclaimers: It’s important that your Exodus does not become a burden in any way upon anyone else at any time. If you are a guest in someone’s home, always receive the gift of hospitality and set aside your plan of life. If you or your spouse forget a meatless meal, always eat what’s before you in gratitude. Keep your ascetic practices to yourself. If it’s done for show, it defeats the whole purpose, and we squander the reward we seek from God alone. To help you navigate common questions about living the ascetic life well, we’ve put together a set of discipline principles. You can find them in the Exodus 90 Guide in the carousel at the top of the Today tab.
Lastly, Exodus 90 is for men 18 and up. There are better resources for young men out there, and feel free to reach out to us about them. Next, most men have a few pounds to lose, but if you are on the lighter side, make sure to get the nutrition you need to function for your vocation. If you need to modify the fasting for this reason, or because of any other medical condition, please do so.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Cry out to God today that he may deliver you from bondage. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
One day, when Moses had grown up, he went out to his people and looked on their burdens; and he saw an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, one of his people. He looked this way and that, and seeing no one, he killed the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. When he went out the next day, behold, two Hebrews were struggling together; and he said to the man that did the wrong, “Why do you strike your fellow?” He answered, “Who made you a prince and a judge over us? Do you mean to kill me as you killed the Egyptian?” Then Moses was afraid, and thought, “Surely the thing is known.” When Pharaoh heard of it, he sought to kill Moses.
But Moses fled from Pharaoh, and stayed in the land of Midian; and he sat down by a well. Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters; and they came and drew water, and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock. The shepherds came and drove them away; but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock. When they came to their father Reuel, he said, “How is it that you have come so soon today?” They said, “An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and even drew water for us and watered the flock.” He said to his daughters, “And where is he? Why have you left the man? Call him, that he may eat bread.” And Moses was content to dwell with the man, and he gave Moses his daughter Zipporah. She bore a son, and he called his name Gershom; for he said, “I have been a sojourner in a foreign land.”
In the course of those many days, the king of Egypt died. And the sons of Israel groaned under their bondage, and cried out for help, and their cry under bondage came up to God. And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. And God saw the sons of Israel, and God knew their condition.
Reflection
God forms us to be the men he calls us to be through all the gifts and experiences he gives us. We may be tempted to use them without reference to God’s plan for our lives.
Moses grows up a prince in the royal household of Egypt, an adopted son of Pharaoh’s daughter. He is educated in Egyptian learning, matures into manhood within their customs, and is prepared for royal duty in the service of the Pharaoh. Because of the witness of St. Stephen in chapter seven of the Acts of the Apostles, tradition divides Moses’s life into three sections: his first forty years in Egypt, forty years in the land of Midian (where he flees today), and forty years leading the people of Israel to the Promised Land.
Dr. John Bergsma, from Franciscan University and the St. Paul Center in Steubenville, Ohio, writes of this time in his book Jesus and the Jubilee:
While educated in the Egyptian royal court, Moses grew to manhood, at which point we realize God’s plan: Moses has only to bide his time till his generation took power, and then, when his royal brother became Pharaoh, Moses would have a high position in the cabinet to influence the court to let the Hebrew slaves go free.
But Moses kills a man in rage.
He desires justice and deliverance for his people, but he wants them to happen immediately. He sees a Hebrew beaten by an Egyptian, “looks this way and that,” and kills him. The following day, when he encourages two Israelites to stop fighting, his divine commission is ironically called into question. Who are you to judge? We know what you’ve done!
The Early Church Fathers are split on the morality of Moses’s action, whether or not he was wrong to kill the Egyptian, or if it was just defense. We know from the passage, though, that Moses’s experience of the event was far from simple: “Moses was afraid, and thought, ‘Surely the thing is known.’” Instead of waiting upon the Lord to deliver his people, he takes life into his own hands. That’s an experience we can all relate to at one time or another.
Fearing for his life, Moses travels southeast from Egypt to the land of Midian; a son of the royal household becomes a sojourner without a home. That should have been the end of Moses, having squandered the opportunity he had been given to help his people. But not only is it not the end, we will see how this event becomes foundational to the new man that Moses will become, as he learns to wait for God to act rather than relying on his own strength.
The marvelous providence of God at work in Moses’s story is worth stepping back to appreciate and experience in ourselves. Don’t we grow impatient and want to do things our own way and in our own time? As Moses flees, can we join him on the road and consider what he may have thought and felt as he flees from everyone and everything he knows?
I cannot believe what I’ve done.
What was I thinking?
My people will always be slaves in Egypt.
I’ve failed the purpose of my life.
I blew it.
As we flee from Egypt today with Moses, which part of our past or struggle in the present do we believe to be our end? God’s ways and his time are not our own. As we see in the story of Moses, his providence is at work, not in spite of, but through our weaknesses, to bring about his plan. Perhaps if Moses had stayed even a day longer in the courts of Egypt, he would have succumbed to the luxuries of royal life that God needed to break him out of?
We can be sure that the Lord hears our groans and cries, like he heard those of the Israelites bound in Egypt all those years ago. He knows where we have been, what we have done that causes us to look this way and that, and to worry about who may find out. He also knows our Midian, the places to which we flee to hide. Today, let’s renew our confidence in the Lord: our future remains intact before his eyes for our greatest good if we persevere in his love.
Let us pray.
We praise you, Lord, for your providential designs, which led Moses—from difficult beginnings and through his own weaknesses and failures—to become the leader and champion of your people, guiding them into deeper relationship with you, even as they journeyed for many years in the desert. Father, thank you for seeing each one of us: the things that cause us fear, that make us look this way and that, the parts of ourselves that we’re afraid are unredeemable, but that we entrust to you today, knowing that nothing is beyond redemption. You work all things to the good; you have a beautiful story for each one of us; and you will bring our life to the fulfillment of our mission insofar as we keep letting you. And so we choose again today to let you. We entrust our lives to you that you might bring about your purposes in us. We make this prayer through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Preparation
Exodus 3:1-6





Brothers, welcome to Day 6 of Exodus 90.
Before we begin with our prayer today, we would like to offer a word on prayer, which is foundational to our journey towards freedom in Christ. Prayer is simply conversation with God. It is through prayer that we enter into our relationship with God. And it’s not so unlike our normal human interactions and relationships. Fr. Boniface Hicks writes in his powerful book Personal Prayer that vulnerability “is the key to the most fruitful prayer” and “the meeting point of God and man.”
When we pray, we listen, we hear, we share, we ask, and we dream with the Lord.
We often think that we need to overcome our human needs in order to pray better. For example, “If I didn’t have this headache? Or If I didn’t have all this stress from work? Or If I could just quiet down my mind, I would be able to pray better!” But this is not true. We pray just as we are, as human beings, and as men, amid all of the responsibilities, concerns, and the struggles of our daily lives. To learn to pray, then, is not to overcome our humanity. To pray is to become more human, to become who we are as sons of our Father in heaven.
The foundation of prayer is silence, and silence is at odds with the distractions of our time. We must tear ourselves away from the noise so that we can sit still, listen, and share openly with God. As Cardinal Sarah writes in The Power of Silence, “This awakening is necessarily brutal.” Asceticism helps to remove us from the noise so that we can enter more deeply into our relationship with the Lord as we learn to hear his voice and respond to his will.
The time we spend in prayer during Exodus 90 is the most important part of our journey. We’ve crafted your daily Scripture and reflection to help you start your conversation with the Lord each day. Exodus material is not so much like a Bible Study, but more like a path into prayer. If a single verse or word stands out, feel free to stay with it in prayer for as long as you like, even for many days or weeks.
During Exodus 90, we will strive for an hour of daily prayer, and within that hour, we encourage you to spend at least twenty minutes in silent prayer, listening and sharing openly with the Lord. Amid the responsibilities of your life and vocation, an hour of prayer may not be possible, and that’s okay. Do not become discouraged or give up on prayer because you cannot hit an hour. Do the best you can with the time that you have. If you need to start small with a few minutes and build up your time over the coming weeks, we encourage you to do so. From experience, most men find it easier to pray early in the morning or late at night, and it is most likely to happen if we schedule our prayer time and make it a priority in our schedule.
As intimidated as you may be as you begin to pray, brother, you can do it. The more you practice prayer, the more familiar it will become for you and the more confidence you will gain, like so many other things in our lives. But we must persevere no matter the challenges we face because, apart from a life of prayer, we quickly get lost and forget who we are amid the temptations of our time. And, honestly, how can we possibly lead our family, friends, and communities if we are not led first by the Lord?
As we enter more deeply into prayer, by the grace of God, our prayers may become more silent, formed by listening and receiving from the Lord more than the words we say. Fr. Boniface talks about this contemplative form of prayer, “as vulnerable, attentive, loving presence in the relationship between God and man,” which transforms our body, mind, and soul, and patterns us onto the heart and mind of Christ.
Your Father in heaven awaits you now and every day of the journey and beyond in his loving presence.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Prepare yourself for the journey ahead to be ready to receive God’s liberating grace. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Now Moses was keeping the flock of his father-in-law, Jethro, the priest of Midian; and he led his flock to the west side of the wilderness, and came to Horeb, the mountain of God. And the angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush; and he looked, and behold, the bush was burning, yet it was not consumed. And Moses said, “I will turn aside and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.” When the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called to him out of the bush, “Moses, Moses!” And he said, “Here am I.” Then he said, “Do not come near; put off your shoes from your feet, for the place on which you are standing is holy ground.” And he said, “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look at God.
Reflection
If we, as men, are going to come to freedom, more than anything else, we must encounter God and come to him. Apart from God, we will remain stuck in Egypt, suffering under the taskmasters of our sins and vices. But, as our loving Father, he seeks us out.
The burning bush, one of the most memorable icons of the Book of Exodus, brings this reality home to us.
Moses is going about his daily work on Mount Horeb, also known as Mount Sinai, where we will return later in the story. He shepherded the flocks of his father-in-law, Jethro. He sees something extraordinary, unlike anything he had ever seen before: a bush was on fire, but unconsumed by the flames. Moses first turns towards the wonder of his own choice, and then hears not only a voice, but a personal summons: “Moses, Moses!” He responds: “Here am I.” The angel of the Lord tells Moses that the ground has been made holy by the appearance, and he removes his sandals out of reverence for the place. God reveals to him that he is the God of his Fathers: the one, true God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Filled with fear, he hides from him lest he be harmed by the divine presence.
Remember that Moses is eighty years old and had forty years to reflect upon his upbringing, the death of the Egyptian man he killed, to wonder about his reputation in the royal court he abandoned, and to agonize over the burden his people still suffered in Egypt. Good, honest work Moses had, and a lot of time to reflect upon what had become of his life. Rather than fade into oblivion in Midian, as Moses may have preferred for all kinds of natural reasons, God intervenes and entrusts him with a mission. Unlike former years, when Moses would take life into his hands as he saw necessary, he has learned to wait upon the Lord to lead him.
St. Gregory of Nyssa, whose feast day we celebrate today, is an Early Church Father who lived in the fourth century. Along with his biological brother, St. Basil the Great, and their friend, another Gregory named St. Gregory of Nazianzus, the three of them are known as the Cappadocian Fathers. St. Gregory of Nyssa had a profound devotion to Moses, and when he was asked by a young man how to grow in wisdom and virtue, Gregory wrote his Life of Moses, to instruct him in the virtuous life using Moses’s story. We’ll refer back to this text a few times during Exodus 90. St. Gregory writes about this time in Midian as “philosophical,” by which he means these years were spent by Moses in silence and reflection upon the highest things. While Moses never could have expected the task assigned to him, this long time of preparation was essential in order to prepare him. When he was ready in God’s time, whether or not Moses felt himself to be ready, the Lord confronted him. Just like with Moses, we see the importance of preparation in the lives of the saints, many of whom experienced decades of preparation before their task became clear to them.
We live in an on-demand, all-the-time culture. Everything we want to have is one click away. Everything we want to know is a chat with a large language model. And every corporation in the world is incentivized around us with infinite upside to make our lives easier, cheaper, and more comfortable. The problem is that despite all of our advancements, human and spiritual growth do not work this way. As human beings, as men, we have been designed differently from the social experiment within which we find ourselves.
Our transformation into the men we are called to be, into the full stature of manhood in Christ, takes time. A lot of time, as all good things do. The ninety days of Exodus do not mark a finish line, but the beginning. God intervenes when it is time, which is his time, and he uses every experience of our lives as preparation for our purpose. May we, like Moses, have the eyes to notice the burning bushes around us, the openness of heart to turn towards them off the path we’re on, and the ears to hear the Lord as he calls us out by name.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, we praise you for the decades that you took to form Moses and St. Anthony for their mission. We think also of St. Paul and his many years in the desert in formation. And we thank you for the time that you take to form us, each one of us, for the mission that you have uniquely prepared for us in our own unique design. Slow our hearts down. Draw us more deeply into union with you in prayer. Accept the training, the asceticism that we take on in these ninety days. Help us to persevere and hold the truth of your mentorship, your investment in us, that you actually want to be with us, form us, make us great men and even saints. With confidence in our hearts, we open and entrust our lives to you as we make this prayer through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.The Baptism of the Lord
Matthew 3:13-17





Brothers, welcome to Day 7 of Exodus 90.
On Sundays throughout Exodus 90, we will break from the story of Exodus to reflect upon the Gospel from the Sacred Liturgy. This will help us to see how Jesus fulfills the Exodus in Word and Sacrament throughout our journey each week.
Before we begin with our prayer today, we’d like to offer a word on the Lord’s Day rest.
When you started last week, you likely felt busy, distracted, and even anxious. This restlessness is one of the great plagues of our time. Perhaps even Exodus 90, with all of its requirements, just felt like more things to add to an already jam-packed schedule. If you are like most Exodus men, and to your own surprise, the first week was simplifying. Life is starting to slow down. Perhaps you are finding that you have more time than you realized.
We should feel this in a particular way today, on Sunday, which is the Lord’s day of the week. As God rested on the seventh day after his work of creation, and as he will command when he gives the Ten Commandments to Moses, we are commanded into the Lord’s rest on Sunday. Every Sunday is a little Easter on which we remember and celebrate the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead. We relax a discipline each Sunday to remind us of God’s love, and in anticipation of the joy of the Easter season, towards which we are journeying during our Exodus. How will you spend your time today, and on every Sunday, throughout Exodus 90?
We rest by practicing leisure.
What is leisure? According to Josef Pieper, a Catholic philosopher, leisure is the contemplative reception of reality through our highest activities. It’s receiving the gift of life as something greater, and that stands above us. It’s not something that arises from our own work and efforts, but a contemplative reception of life which refreshes our weary souls. Examples of leisure include reading and conversation that lead us into the truth, celebration of feasts, enjoyment of the arts, playing music, and refreshment outside in nature. The highest form of leisure is the worship of God in Christian community, specifically the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.
The world has it backwards. We do not rest on Sundays in order to be more productive in our work the following week. It’s exactly the opposite: we work during the week so that we may rest on Sundays. Sundays, not Mondays, are the beginning of the week in a Christian vision.
Consider how you can spend higher quality time with your family and local community today and on every Sunday throughout the year. Here are a few examples: go on a hike, have a bonfire, throw a family gathering, play board games, read, write, draw, paint, or play music. Get to know your neighbors or the families of the men of your fraternity. Serve the parish or local community.
There are important feast days that we will observe together to enrich our journey to freedom. Your weekly meeting guides, which you can find in the carousel at the top of the Today tab, will call out and remind you of these feast days so that you can celebrate them with intentionality. Today, the feast of the Baptism of the Lord, is one of those celebration days. As Exodus men, we fast so that we can feast. The Cross leads to life.
In our Gospel today, the Baptism of the Lord becomes a new passing through the sea, bringing life out of the death of the waters. It is one way that Jesus completes the great work of the Exodus, freeing us from slavery to sin and bringing us close to the Father as his sons. We are humbled and filled with gratitude today for Bishop Erik Varden, the Bishop of Trondheim in Norway, to lead us in reflecting on the Gospel from today’s liturgy. Bishop Varden is a Cistercian monk, author, and speaker, who has become a friend through our work together on a series on the Desert Fathers this past year.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Enter into the rest provided by the Lord today through divine worship and holy leisure. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Holy Gospel according to Matthew
Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him. John would have prevented him, saying, “I need to be baptized by you, and do you come to me?” But Jesus answered him, “Let it be so now; for thus it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then he consented. And when Jesus was baptized, he went up immediately from the water, and behold, the heavens were opened and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and alighting on him; and behold, a voice from heaven, saying, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.”
Reflection
The feast of Christ’s Baptism can seem like a liturgical cold shower. Since Christmas, our attention has been directed towards the Child in the manger. We have followed him from day to day, from birth to circumcision. We still await his presentation in the Temple, for Christmas lasts, after all, until February 2nd.
In the middle of that period comes today’s feast. According to the chronology of Christmas, Jesus is two weeks old, yet here he stands before us fully adult, about to assume his mature mission. Once we have celebrated the Baptism, we contemplate him again as newborn, preparing to hear Simeon’s exclamation: “This Child will be for the fall and rising of many!”
So what on earth is going on? What can the Church mean by throwing us backwards and forwards in time in this way? As ever, there is a pedagogical intention. It deserves to be pondered carefully.
The Christian mystery is one. The more we go deep into it, the better we understand it as a whole. The suckling Child in Mary’s arms is the Man of Sorrows who calls out from the Cross: “It is accomplished!” The Word born in a stable while Quirinius was governor of Syria is the same Word that, at the beginning, resounded, “Let there be light.” The Child to whom the Magi offer gifts is the Judge who at the end of time will separate sheep from goats.
It is hard to maintain such a broad perspective. We men are most at ease with things we can (or imagine we can) survey. When we think of our own lives, we focus on a single aspect at a time, which is one reason why we often make imprudent decisions. We look at the life of our Savior similarly. There’s no fundamental harm in doing so; though we do risk reducing him to less than he is and delimiting our response to him.
The Church, our Mother, would expand the outlook of our heart towards eternity. The reign of Christ, we say in the creed, “will have no end.” To thrive within it, we need to learn to tend towards endlessness. The liturgy dilates our notions. Again and again, we are led to wonder at the connectedness of God’s design. We wonder in order to worship him who works it. He alone sees everything, from the beginning of creation to the end of time, as a single act, the expression of a single Word, the Word that became flesh, which for us is summarized in the name Jesus.
To grasp how the Baptism of the Lord fits into Christmas, we must remember that the feast is a prolongation of the Epiphany. The revelation of Christ to the Magi represents the incorporation of the Gentiles into God’s salvation, a motif proclaimed to us in Advent and at Christmas through the grandiose prophecies of Isaiah. The Baptism of Christ represents the accomplishment of promises made to Israel. The Lord makes this explicit when he says to John: “Thus we shall fulfill all righteousness.” In Christ, humanity is united. The election of Israel appears as the providential preparation for the whole world’s redemption.
Jesus stands in the middle of the Jordan, the frontier that since Abraham had marked the Promised Land off from the rest of the earth. He stands there pontifically, as a bridge-builder; from now on, the Gospel will reach the ends of the earth. The alabaster jar is broken open for the whole house to be filled with its aroma. What we witness on these terms is a horizontal revelation, the continuation of a historical process that makes God’s plan known to mankind and defines the relationship between peoples.
The Baptism also has a vertical aspect. It lets us see and hear who Jesus is. What we see is the Spirit descending in the shape of a dove. What we hear is the Father’s voice proclaiming, “You are my beloved Son.” The mystery of the Blessed Trinity is here more clearly expressed than at any other point in the Gospel.
In iconography, the Baptism is presented, not primarily as a historical scene; it is depicted as Theophany, in other words, as a revelation of God himself. Time and eternity meet along a vertical axis.
If you look at a painted icon of the Baptism, you will often, at the top, see a circle, the geometrical symbol of perfection. It indicates the Father, whose voice is made visible as rays of glory. In these rays hovers the dove, the Spirit, which in Noah’s days found the olive branch that showed the earth, having been washed clean, able once again to bear fruit for nourishment and healing. The central figure is Christ himself. He is not covered by the water. He stands on it, just as, later, he would stand on the Sea of Gennesaret, to the Twelve’s astonishment. He is the Creator enthroned upon creation. He stands there as a priest with blessing hands to sanctify the water, making it an instrument of grace for us.
In the traditional form of the icon, we find the Baptist on the left bank. He is the last and greatest of the prophets. By putting his fingers on Christ’s head, he touches the fulfillment of Israel’s hope through generations. On the right bank are angels with covered hands and lowered heads, adoring. They testify that elements of earth have become expressions of the praise they sing eternally before the face of God. We remember this at Mass when the priest affirms our communion with “angels and archangels, thrones and dominions” before, in unison with them, we acclaim: “Holy! Holy! Holy!” Through Christ, the kingdom of God is in our midst.
The Baptism, then, is a feast of revelation. It anchors the grace of Christ in Biblical salvation history. It manifests the Trinity of God.
Israel had premonitions of this mystery; in Christ, it is made clear.
The Baptism of Christ is the source of our baptism. In baptism, we are born as sons of God, to live as members of Christ’s Body, which he assumed to accomplish his work of redemption. The grace of Christmas tells us who God is, who we are; then it points towards the great, salvific work of Easter.
We are summoned, then, to look both backward and forward: backward with gratitude for good things received and regret for our betrayals; forward with courage as we set out to realize our Christian purpose. Emerged from baptismal waters, after forty days of spiritual battle in the wilderness, Jesus proclaimed to the world: “Repent and believe the Gospel!” That is our program statement still, for remember: “The kingdom of God is close at hand.” Very close.
Let us pray.
We thank you, Lord, for the immeasurable, wonderful gift of our baptism. Help us to live out its full potential. Help us to recognize and welcome the imprint of your Holy Cross on our own lives. Help us to live in the firm confidence of your total victory over the power of death and over all might of sin. Show yourself, Lord, our redeemer. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Chosen and Called
Exodus 3:7-12





Brothers, welcome to Day 8 of Exodus 90.
For the last time, before we begin with our scripture reading and reflection, we’d like to offer you a word of encouragement.
Challenges exist in every age because of the consequences of sin and the influence of the devil. This will always be the case. However, the challenges of our age are immense, and we all feel it.
When we look out into the world, it’s so common for men to lose hope. Is this what God meant for his people? What would our fathers in the faith think, who shed their blood to preserve it? What can I really do to make a difference?
It’s common for men to despair and to become cynical and sarcastic. It’s easy to sit around and criticize our leaders and to think that there’s nothing we can personally do.
But, men, this is our time. . .
This is the time that our Father, in his infallible providence, has entrusted to each one of us. We were not created for the past, or the future, but for now.
It’s common for men to despair and become cynical and sarcastic today. And it’s easy to sit around and waste our time on social media and other numbing distractions, wishing for bygone days or chasing the next moment of entertainment. But there’s another way—an uncommon way.
What’s uncommon for men today is to embrace the opportunity that lies in every challenge and to do something about it. What’s uncommon is to take to the ancient path that you have begun to trod in prayer, asceticism, and fraternity. What’s uncommon then is to respond as generously as possible to the unique graces and gifts that God bestows upon you in his holy will. What’s uncommon is to live as though we are ready for Christ to return today, and if he does not come for thousands of years from now, to spend our lives laying foundations for our brothers in the faith who will come after us to build upon.
The influence of a good and holy man like you, who receives his identity from God as a son, and who then shares the love of God with those that have been entrusted to his care (especially his wife, children, brothers and sisters in the faith, and local community), cannot be measured. The fruits of a faithful man’s life redound for generations, and into eternity, with invisible and everlasting power.
Thank you. Thank you for saying yes to the journey. May the Lord, who has begun your Exodus, grant your deliverance in his time. May he bestow every grace and blessing to bring your Exodus to fulfillment. And may he come to dwell within each one of us in a new way this year with his presence.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Respond to the voice of the Lord calling you to serve him and others today. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Then the Lord said, “I have seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and have heard their cry because of their taskmasters; I know their sufferings, and I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land to a good and broad land, a land flowing with milk and honey, to the place of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites. And now, behold, the cry of the sons of Israel has come to me, and I have seen the oppression with which the Egyptians oppress them. Come, I will send you to Pharaoh that you may bring forth my people, the sons of Israel, out of Egypt.” But Moses said to God, “Who am I that I should go to Pharaoh, and bring the sons of Israel out of Egypt?” He said, “But I will be with you; and this shall be the sign for you, that I have sent you: when you have brought forth the people out of Egypt, you shall serve God upon this mountain.”
Reflection
The first step in coming to freedom is not addressing what is wrong. First, it is coming to know the One who can actually bring about our freedom. At the burning bush, God reveals to Moses that he is the God of his Fathers: the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He invokes his patrimony, and in response, before the names of these great men chosen by the one, true God, Moses hides his face.
The Lord responds to the fear of Moses surprisingly. Rather than rebuking his fear or telling him to man up for his mission, he says: “I have seen the affliction of my people. . . . I have heard their cry because of their taskmasters. . . . I know their sufferings . . . and I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians.”
In response to his fear, God shows Moses his heart.
The God of Israel is not abstract or detached from creation. He transcends it, for he is not part of creation as the pagans thought. He is the Creator and is distinct from the work of his hands. But he remains immanent, far closer than Moses ever could have imagined.
In the fullness of time, Jesus reveals to us that God is a Trinity of Persons: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. He is a Father who sends his Son, so that his Spirit can live within our souls and hearts. The God of the Old Testament is the God of the New. We see the fatherhood of God on display plainly today in the Book of Exodus.
When times are hard, when we experience suffering like the Israelites, we can ask almost reflexively: “Do you see? Can you hear me? Do you understand? Where are you?”
And God answers, “I have seen, I have heard, I know, and I have come down.”
St. John Henry Newman, a 20th-century English saint and new Doctor of the Church, preaches this truth as only he can, which is worth quoting at length:
God beholds you individually, whoever you are. He “calls you by your name.” He sees you, and understands you, as he made you. He knows what is in you, all your own peculiar feelings and thoughts, your dispositions and likings, your strength and your weakness. He views you in your day of rejoicing, and your day of sorrow. He sympathises in your hopes and your temptations. He interests himself in all your anxieties and remembrances, all the risings and fallings of your spirit. He has numbered the very hairs of your head and the cubits of your stature. He compasses you round and bears you in his arms; he takes you up and sets you down. He notes your very countenance, whether smiling or in tears, whether healthful or sickly. He looks tenderly upon your hands and your feet; he hears your voice, the beating of your heart, and your very breathing. You do not love yourself better than he loves you. You cannot shrink from pain more than he dislikes you bearing it; and if he puts it on you, it is as you would put it on yourself, if you are wise, for a greater good afterwards. You’re not only his creature (though for the very sparrows he has a care, and pitied the “much cattle” of Nineveh), you are man redeemed and sanctified, his adopted son, favoured with a portion of that glory and blessedness which flows from him everlastingly unto the Only-begotten. . . . What is man, what are we, what am I, that the Son of God should be so mindful of me? What am I, that he should have raised me from almost a devil’s nature to that of an Angel’s? That he should have changed my soul’s original constitution, new-made me, who from my youth up have been a transgressor, and should himself dwell personally in this very heart of mine, making me his temple? What am I, that God the Holy Ghost should enter into me, and draw up my thoughts heavenward “with sighs too deep for words”?
O the cries of the Israelites, and to our cries, the Lord says, “I have seen, I have heard, I know, and I have come down.”
But Moses, I call you, I choose you for the mission at hand.
“Who am I that I should go to Pharaoh, and bring the sons of Israel out of Egypt?” That’s the question of a humbled man, weathered by life, fully aware of his limitations. God can work wonders with that kind of man, with those dispositions, and he chooses Moses to go on an adventure with divine purpose.
God assures him simply, “I will be with you.” And he secures the revelation with a sign, “and this shall be the sign for you, that I have sent you; when you have brought forth the people out of Egypt, you shall serve God upon this mountain.”
The assurance that Moses receives is the presence of God, who promises to be with him. But note that the sign that he has been sent by God will only be fulfilled for Moses in the future, after he has responded. He must carry within himself, unfulfilled for a time, whether or not he has been called.
When the Lord calls us by name, he promises to be with us. But we must step forward in faith, willing to take a venture with the Lord, waiting for the confirmation of our call to be confirmed, and persevering through the doubts we experience from within and without.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, thank you for revealing yourself to me, helping me to know that I have a good Father, that I have a Savior in Jesus Christ, your Son, and that in the power of the Holy Spirit, you are always with me. Thank you for helping me to know myself and to know my mission. To know that in the face of my inadequacies and insecurities, you give me your own accompaniment, you walk with me, and you promise always to be with me. Help me to persevere through all my doubts as I carry out my mission in this world. Show me the way, and I will remain with you starting today. I make this prayer in the name of Jesus, Our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.The One Who IS
Exodus 3:13-22





Brothers, welcome to Day 9 of Exodus 90.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Recognize the Lord for who he is today, the one who simply is, was, and will always be. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Then Moses said to God, “If I come to the sons of Israel and say to them, ‘The God of your fathers has sent me to you,’ and they ask me, ‘What is his name?’ what shall I say to them?” God said to Moses, “I AM WHO I AM.”
And he said, “Say this to the sons of Israel, ‘I am has sent me to you.’” God also said to Moses, “Say this to the sons of Israel, ‘The Lord, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you’: this is my name for ever, and thus I am to be remembered throughout all generations.
Go and gather the elders of Israel together, and say to them, ‘The Lord, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has appeared to me, saying, “I have observed you and what has been done to you in Egypt; and I promise that I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt, to the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, a land flowing with milk and honey.”’ And they will listen to your voice; and you and the elders of Israel shall go to the king of Egypt and say to him, ‘The Lord, the God of the Hebrews, has met with us; and now, we beg you, let us go a three days’ journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the Lord our God.’ I know that the king of Egypt will not let you go unless compelled by a mighty hand. So I will stretch out my hand and strike Egypt with all the wonders which I will do in it; after that he will let you go.
And I will give this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians; and when you go, you shall not go empty, but each woman shall ask of her neighbor, and of her who sojourns in her house, jewelry of silver and of gold, and clothing, and you shall put them on your sons and on your daughters; thus you shall despoil the Egyptians.”
Reflection
Once we know who God is, the greater I AM and liberator of his people, we can begin to understand ourselves better in relation to him. In response to God’s call, Moses responds by asking the Lord, But who am I? Who am I to have such a task? The Lord responds graciously, telling Moses that he will be with him.
Today, still before the burning bush, Moses puts a condition on his response. If I go, when they ask me who sent me, what am I to say?
Moses realizes that to fulfill his mission, he must make God known to the people. So he asks him: Who are you?
We know from Genesis that God entrusts Adam with the authority to name his creation. A name reveals the identity of a thing. To entrust someone with your name is an act of trust, an act of vulnerability. The Lord is vulnerable with Moses.
The Lord tells Moses his name: “I am who I am,” and to tell the people, “I am sent me to you.” In response to Moses’s doubt about who he is, God entrusts him with who he is. The self-doubt of Moses’s “Who am I?” is replaced with the name of the foundation for all that is: I am who I am.
As we continue our own Exodus, our own journey towards greater freedom, it is worth returning to these questions daily:
Who are you?
Who am I?
Who are you to me?
And allow, in the space we create in silent prayer each day, to receive the Lord’s gentle affirmations: “I am your Father. You are my son. I am with you.”
Moses is to leave the anonymity of Midian, what was a simple, hidden life as a shepherd, for an adventure filled with conflict. Life with God is far from comfortable or safe. As we see before the bush, our God is a consuming fire. While we are secure in his hands, as the bush unburned, his call leads us straight into the battles we would never want, but must face, in order to bring about his holy will.
The more the Lord says to Moses, the more Moses perceives the existential dangers before him. He faces three battles: with himself, with his people, and with the enemies of Israel.
The first battle is for Moses to return to the land of his past. Moses has to confront the old man in him without nostalgia for who he could have become in the royal household. So must we. We must look at our past, accept it, not as it may have been, but just as it was. Only then can we learn to love who we are now, and to seek who we can still become. Can we look upon ourselves with the compassion of a neighbor? Can we look at ourselves in the past and treat them as graciously as we would treat a brother in the same situation? It is through acceptance that we come to the possession required in order to give ourselves away generously in love.
The second battle ahead of Moses is with his own people, whose murmuring will increase. Moses, who has been missing for forty years, is now to appear to the elders, the religious leaders of his people, and let them know that God has appeared to him of all people. The Lord assures Moses, despite his own doubts about what they will say and think, that they will listen. This time, they do. How often do we hide from what we must say out of fear for how we will be perceived?
The final battles are the most unlikely to be won: Moses is then to confront the forces of Egypt embodied in the Pharaoh. Still more, should the mission be fulfilled and God’s people be delivered as the Lord has promised, the Promised Land the people of Israel are to occupy is now inhabited by all of their enemies: the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites.
Today, as we make space for the Lord to speak through our practice of asceticism and in silent prayer each day, may we consider the battles before us: with our past, and perhaps, with those who know us, and those who do not.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, thank you for revealing yourself to us. You took the risk to show us who you are, giving us your name—not only the name you revealed to Moses on Mount Sinai, but who you are as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, You have given us the name of Jesus, revealing to us and sharing with us your own holy spirit. Thank you for seeing in us more than we see in ourselves and so empowering us to face those battles with our past, with those who know us, and as you send us out today among those who do not know us, but before whom we bring your presence. Help us to do so faithfully. We make this prayer in the name of Jesus, our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Overcoming Doubts
Exodus 4:1-17





Brothers, welcome to Day 10 of Exodus 90.
Throughout Exodus 90, we keep Wednesdays and Fridays as particular days of penance. They honor Jesus’s betrayal by Judas and his death on the Cross, respectively. Our added asceticisms of fasting and abstinence from meat, in addition to our other disciplines, call us to enter into Jesus’s loving self-gift of himself in his Passion and death. Embracing his love is the key to growing in freedom.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Let go of your hesitations in responding to the Lord today, embracing his will wholeheartedly. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Then Moses answered, “But behold, they will not believe me or listen to my voice, for they will say, ‘The Lord did not appear to you.’” The Lord said to him, “What is that in your hand?” He said, “A rod.” And he said, “Cast it on the ground.” So he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from it. But the Lord said to Moses, “Put out your hand, and take it by the tail”—so he put out his hand and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand—“that they may believe that the Lord, the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has appeared to you.” Again, the Lord said to him, “Put your hand into your bosom.” And he put his hand into his bosom; and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous, as white as snow.
Then God said, “Put your hand back into your bosom.” So he put his hand back into his bosom; and when he took it out, behold, it was restored like the rest of his flesh. “If they will not believe you,” God said, “or heed the first sign, they may believe the latter sign. If they will not believe even these two signs or heed your voice, you shall take some water from the Nile and pour it upon the dry ground; and the water which you shall take from the Nile will become blood upon the dry ground.”
But Moses said to the Lord, “Oh, my Lord, I am not eloquent, either heretofore or since you have spoken to your servant; but I am slow of speech and of tongue.” Then the Lord said to him, “Who has made man’s mouth? Who makes him mute, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? Is it not I, the Lord? Now therefore go, and I will be with your mouth and teach you what you shall speak.” But he said, “Oh, my Lord, send, I pray, some other person.” Then the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses and he said, “Is there not Aaron, your brother, the Levite? I know that he can speak well; and behold, he is coming out to meet you, and when he sees you he will be glad in his heart. And you shall speak to him and put the words in his mouth; and I will be with your mouth and with his mouth, and will teach you what you shall do. He shall speak for you to the people; and he shall be a mouth for you, and you shall be to him as God. And you shall take in your hand this rod, with which you shall do the signs.”
Reflection
Questioning can easily turn to doubt. After encountering God in the burning bush, Moses began questioning the one who called out to him. His simple, earnest “Who are you?” and “Who am I?” spiral away from him into self-doubt, which knows no bounds.
Moses gets ahead of himself and enters into the dangerous space of conjecture about what others will say. “They will not believe me or listen to my voice, for they will say, ‘The Lord did not appear to you.’”
The Lord offers Moses three signs to confirm his call. The first one is gracious; he holds it in his hand. Moses is to cast his rod on the ground for it to become a snake. The Lord makes use of the little that Moses has. That Moses flees from the rod-serpent afterwards is touching; wouldn’t we do the same? The second sign is his own hand, which turns leprous and then back to health as he takes it in and out of his cloak. The Lord offers a third and final sign if they are not to take the first two or to listen to his voice; Moses is to take water from the Nile, pour it out on the ground, as it turns to blood.
Having been answered, Moses’s doubt turns inward now. “Oh, my Lord, I am not eloquent, either heretofore or since you have spoken to your servant; but I am slow of speech and of tongue.” The Ignatius Catholic Study Bible makes this note: “The Hebrew reads ‘I am not a man of words,’ whereas the Greek Septuagint reads ‘I am not sufficient.’” Both indicate that Moses trembles at the prospect of being the Lord’s prophet because he feels inadequate for the task.
The Lord responds by asking Moses who made his mouth and every mouth, and assures Moses once again of his presence: “I will be with your mouth and teach you what you will speak.”
God has offered him signs to confirm his call. He has promised to make up for his weaknesses with his presence. And before he has even begun, Moses’s doubt turns to quit.
“Oh, my Lord, send, I pray, some other person.”
Send somebody else, Lord.
It’s only here that we read of the anger of the Lord. He’s not upset with Moses’s objections or the concerns of his heart. His anger is kindled when Moses attempts to decline his vocation, to run from his calling. But the Lord responds compassionately, offering Moses his brother Aaron as a companion for the journey and yet another accommodation for his task.
When we read about the doubts and falls of biblical characters, some of whom rise again and others who do not, it’s easy to take on the perspective of a judge with the convenience of hindsight. For example, as we read about Moses’s struggle with his call, or when we encounter the doubts of St. Thomas and the denials of St. Peter in the Gospels, it’s all too easy to say, “What were they thinking?!” This is not a mature reading of Scripture or of our own human nature. We would do well to remember that future generations will look similarly back upon us.
We learn about the dynamic of divine calls in Moses’s resistance and in the Lord’s response. Divine calls are invisible, and we often run from them out of fear of the unknown. We fear what the adventure may entail and what others will think as we begin to venture. We see today that the Lord confirms his calls graciously, by signs and in the gift of others.
We noted how the first sign was the very rod that Moses held in his hand. God did not ask him to do something unreasonable, just to throw down his rod on the ground. Moses could do that. The confirmations of our call work the same way. They are right in front of us in our daily lives. Sometimes we are wrong about them, which is why confirmations are so important.
Though calls are experienced personally, they are always given by God for others. Our calls are always about growing in the love of God and the love of our neighbor. We will know the authenticity of our calls by the love they bear. Confide the calls you receive with those closest to you: your spouse, a spiritual father, or the men of your fraternity. Like Aaron, they will come to your aid, bring clarity to your thoughts through discussion, and keep you accountable to the next step. And commit to being a good Aaron for those who are called before you.
We all experience moments of doubt. It’s impossible to embark on a great and daring adventure, such as our journey to freedom, without experiencing them. We are not alone in our doubts about who we are, and as we seek to become who we are called to be. The great liberator of God’s people did too. When we do, we must recall that our assurance is the presence of the Lord. Our confidence is in the power of Christ, which not only overcomes but works precisely through our weakness and inadequacy (2 Corinthians 12:7-10).
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, thank you for giving us a mission. Thank you for calling us to serve. Thank you for giving us signs and reassurances. And thank you above all for giving us brothers who can reinforce our calling; support us in our weakness; help us in our trials; remind us who we are, your beloved sons; and what we are made for, perfect freedom and perfect love. Help us to receive this support and also be this support. We make this prayer in Jesus’s name. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Free to Serve
Exodus 4:18-31





Brothers, welcome to Day 11 of Exodus 90.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Serve the Lord today by offering him worship. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Moses went back to his father-in-law Jethro and said to him, “Please let me go back to my kindred in Egypt and see whether they are still living.” And Jethro said to Moses, “Go in peace.” The Lord said to Moses in Midian, “Go back to Egypt; for all those who were seeking your life are dead.” So Moses took his wife and his sons, put them on a donkey, and went back to the land of Egypt; and Moses carried the staff of God in his hand.
And the Lord said to Moses, “When you go back to Egypt, see that you perform before Pharaoh all the wonders that I have put in your power; but I will harden his heart, so that he will not let the people go. Then you shall say to Pharaoh, ‘Thus says the Lord: Israel is my firstborn son. I said to you, “Let my son go that he may worship me.” But you refused to let him go; now I will kill your firstborn son.’”
At a lodging place on the way the Lord met him and sought to kill him. Then Zipporah took a flint and cut off her son’s foreskin, and touched Moses’ feet with it, and said, “Surely you are a bridegroom of blood to me!” So he let him alone. Then it was that she said, “You are a bridegroom of blood,” because of the circumcision.
The Lord said to Aaron, “Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.” So he went, and met him at the mountain of God and kissed him. And Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord with which he had sent him, and all the signs which he had charged him to do. Then Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the sons of Israel. And Aaron spoke all the words which the Lord had spoken to Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people. And the people believed; and when they heard that the Lord had visited the sons of Israel and that he had seen their affliction, they bowed their heads and worshiped.
Reflection
When we experience doubts, we must make a decision. Will we push through, despite the obstacles, or will we allow them to turn us back? Having worked through his objections and refusals, Moses heeds the voice of the Lord. Having received his call from the Lord, you might think he would just up and leave Midian.
He doesn’t. Before departing, Moses seeks the blessing of his father-in-law, Jethro, before beginning his journey home to Egypt. His respect and obedience for his father-in-law reveal something of his character.
Jethro is a priest of the land of Midian, both a religious and civic leader by office for his people. Later on in the story, he re-emerges to play an important role. While there are different views on whether or not Jethro worshipped the Lord among other gods, it is likely that Jethro reflects the practices of the time in worshipping many gods, as was common in Near Eastern polytheistic religions.
We live in an age that fails to acknowledge the God-given nature of authority, and still more actively seeks to deconstruct our institutions through skepticism, rebellion, and reputational smearing. Our fathers, fathers-in-law, the pope, bishops, pastors, and government leaders have been entrusted by God with authority and have been placed over us for a purpose. Each is entrusted with a domain in which to lead, govern, and guide, but we would do well to remember how Moses treats his father-in-law, even if he was unlikely to have fully shared his values or the way he looked at the world.
Having received the blessing of his father-in-law, the Lord then confirms his calling and informs Moses that those who sought his life are now dead. These are the precise verses that the Gospel writers will paraphrase to describe when the Holy Family returns to Israel from Egypt.
After forty years in Midian, he departs with his wife and sons on a donkey with the wonder-rod in his hand. The Lord asks Moses not to play small, but to work “all” the miracles that the Lord has put into his power to perform. As we grow into our faith, it’s easy to answer the Lord partially, hedging the graces we receive in some way, typically out of embarrassment. The Lord, who, as Fr. Boniface says, “never hedges his bets or counts the cost,” asks Moses to do all that he has put into his power to do.
The Lord sums up the heart of the mission entrusted to Moses in today’s reading: “You shall say to Pharaoh, ‘Thus says the Lord, Israel is my first-born son, and I say to you, “Let my son go that he may serve me”; if you refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay your first-born son.’” The threat of the death of the firstborn son anticipates the final, most dramatic plague, which we will be reading about in the coming days.
The Lord claims the people of Israel as his own among all the nations. He has come close to the chosen people of Israel, as Father to a son. The Lord has chosen Israel first among all nations so that he can, in time, come close to the whole of humanity.
The choice of the people of Israel is not without a purpose. They have been chosen to serve the Lord. The Hebrew word “abad” means to serve, to work, or to worship. We see the Lord drawing the lines in today’s reading: you may work for Pharaoh as a slave, or you may worship me as a son.
We have been chosen so that the Lord can draw close to all those entrusted to our care. As we make our way into greater freedom through our Exodus, may we always remember that our freedom has been won for a purpose: to worship the Lord. The Lord sends Aaron to Moses as a companion, and the brothers of our fraternity have been sent to accompany and encourage us in our own journey to freedom.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, thank you for placing men like Jethro in our lives who can give us a blessing, who can send us forth even if we don’t see eye to eye about everything. You still communicate your blessing to us through them. Thank you for sending us forth, for sending us into freedom, a freedom that is not meant for license but for service. Thank you for the privilege to serve, to worship, to work. Thank you for those that you entrust to us, whom we have the privilege of blessing, of being your face and your voice and your heart, your hands, and your feet for them. Help us to live this day in that service, in a special way with our fraternity, our brothers whom you have placed around us. Help us to serve one another and so practice living in the freedom of the kingdom that you have provided for us in Jesus, your son and our Lord. We make this prayer in his name. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Pushing through Resistance
Exodus 5:1-9; 15-21





Brothers, welcome to Day 12 of Exodus 90.
Today is Friday, a special day of penance to honor Jesus’s Passion and death on the Cross. Our fasting and abstinence from meat call us to look beyond the flesh and its normal sustenance to rely more on God, growing in hunger for his divine presence. Offer your sacrifices today to grow closer to him and for your “why,” trusting in God’s grace to bring you to freedom and bless all those for whom you are praying.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Resolve to follow him no matter the obstacle today. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Afterward Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and said, “Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, ‘Let my people go, that they may hold a feast to me in the wilderness.’” But Pharaoh said, “Who is the Lord, that I should heed his voice and let Israel go? I do not know the Lord, and moreover I will not let Israel go.” Then they said, “The God of the Hebrews has met with us; let us go, we beg, a three days’ journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to the Lord our God, lest he fall upon us with pestilence or with the sword.” But the king of Egypt said to them, “Moses and Aaron, why do you take the people away from their work? Get to your burdens.” And Pharaoh said, “Behold, the people of the land are now many and you make them rest from their burdens!” The same day Pharaoh commanded the taskmasters of the people and their foremen, “You shall no longer give the people straw to make bricks, as heretofore; let them go and gather straw for themselves. But the number of bricks which they made heretofore you shall lay upon them, you shall by no means lessen it; for they are idle; therefore they cry, ‘Let us go and offer sacrifice to our God.’ Let heavier work be laid upon the men that they may labor at it and pay no regard to lying words.”
Then the foremen of the sons of Israel came and cried to Pharaoh, “Why do you deal thus with your servants? No straw is given to your servants, yet they say to us, ‘Make bricks!’ And behold, your servants are beaten; but the fault is in your own people.” But he said, “You are idle, you are idle; therefore you say, ‘Let us go and sacrifice to the Lord.’ Go now, and work; for no straw shall be given you, yet you shall deliver the same number of bricks.” The foremen of the sons of Israel saw that they were in evil plight, when they said, “You shall by no means lessen your daily number of bricks.” They met Moses and Aaron, who were waiting for them, as they came forth from Pharaoh; and they said to them, “The Lord look upon you and judge, because you have made us offensive in the sight of Pharaoh and his servants, and have put a sword in their hand to kill us.”
Reflection
The road to freedom is not smooth. There will be obstacles, yet we must remain firm as we face them.
Yesterday, we noted how the Lord drew the line: “Let my son go that he may serve me.”
The Lord desired his people to worship him in freedom as his sons instead of working for Pharaoh in slavery.
Desiring this freedom, the people of Israel listened to the invitation of Moses and Aaron, and today our protagonists come before Pharaoh for the first time with the message from the burning bush. They do it, they find the courage to say what they have been commanded: “Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, ‘Let my people go, that they may hold a feast to me in the wilderness.’”
Pharaoh responds in disbelief: “Who is this god? I do not know him.” The request to feast, rest, and worship the Lord deeply violated Pharaoh’s belief in his own divinity and ability to resist the influence of foreign gods. Pharaoh responds by reasserting his authority, accusing the Israelites of laziness, and punishes them accordingly. “Moses and Aaron, why do you take the people away from their work? Get to your burdens.” They are to make bricks without the resources they need to fulfill their quota. The people’s desire for freedom has been met with a greater burden by Pharaoh.
In his Life of Moses, St. Gregory of Nyssa teaches how the story of the Exodus can be applied to us as we seek to pattern our mind onto the truth and our lives to virtue. He says this about today’s reading:
When Moses had spoken these excellent words and had offered his hearers freedom and had strengthened their desire for it, the enemy was provoked and increased the suffering of those who hearkened to his speech. This is not unlike what happens now. For many of those who have accepted the word as a liberator from tyranny and have identified themselves with the Gospel are today still threatened by the adversary with onslaughts of temptations.
When we commit to serve the Lord, or to serve him more faithfully as we are during our Exodus, we will meet resistance. We will experience temptations from within ourselves or from others to go back to an easier, more comfortable way of life, like everybody else. “Who is this God you want to serve? Get back to your burdens, to your work without resources!”
Our temptations often discourage and embarrass us, making us believe that we are the only man in the world who struggles as we do. But this is not true. We are not alone. And more than that: that we are tempted is a sign not of our weakness, but that we are on the right path. Those who are not are not tempted at all. Temptations are not only part of the Christian life; viewed properly, they are preparations for our future that can strengthen our faith and our dependence upon the Lord for his grace if we rely upon him.
To complete our Exodus, we need perseverance, especially as we come up against our own limits and failures. As you experience temptation during your journey, bring them out of the darkness of loneliness into the light of your fraternity. Rely upon your anchor and the men of your fraternity for strength, and refuse to give in to discouragement, which is the devil’s number one weapon.
Let us pray.
Lord, thank you for calling us on this journey to freedom—freedom to serve and worship—a journey that requires perseverance as we face temptations today. Protect us from discouragement. Help us to stand firm with our brothers in faith. Inspire us to call on you and place our trust in you. Walk with us through these hard roads, and deepen our dependence on you and our confidence in your providence. And we ask all this in the name of your Son, Jesus our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Remember the Call
Exodus 5:22-23, 6:1-13





Brothers, welcome to Day 13 of Exodus 90.
Today is the feast of St. Antony of Egypt, the founder of monasticism in the desert. He heard the call of the Lord, sold everything he possessed, and left his home to follow the Lord. He dedicated his life to prayer and, by relying on God’s grace, was able to overcome the world, the flesh, and the devil. We ask for his prayers as we, too, battle in the desert for our freedom in Christ.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Allow the Lord to lead you today, responding to his call to follow him. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Then Moses turned again to the Lord and said, “O Lord, why have you done evil to this people? Why did you ever send me? For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in your name, he has done evil to this people, and you have not delivered your people at all.” But the Lord said to Moses, “Now you shall see what I will do to Pharaoh; for with a strong hand he will send them out, yes, with a strong hand he will drive them out of his land.”
And God said to Moses, “I am the Lord. I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, as God Almighty, but by my name the Lord I did not make myself known to them. I also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land in which they dwelt as sojourners. Moreover I have heard the groaning of the sons of Israel whom the Egyptians hold in bondage and I have remembered my covenant. Say therefore to the sons of Israel, ‘I am the Lord, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will deliver you from their bondage, and I will redeem you with an outstretched arm and with great acts of judgment, and I will take you for my people, and I will be your God; and you shall know that I am the Lord your God, who has brought you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians. And I will bring you into the land which I swore to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; I will give it to you for a possession. I am the Lord.’” Moses spoke thus to the sons of Israel; but they did not listen to Moses, because of their broken spirit and their cruel bondage.
And the Lord said to Moses, “Go in, tell Pharaoh king of Egypt to let the sons of Israel go out of his land.” But Moses said to the Lord, “Behold, the sons of Israel have not listened to me; how then shall Pharaoh listen to me, who am a man of uncircumcised lips?” But the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, and gave them a charge to the sons of Israel and to Pharaoh king of Egypt to bring the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt.
Reflection
Failure can lead us to forget—especially our abilities, reassuring memories, confirmations of our calls, and even our identity.
After his long journey back to Egypt, Moses does what he is told to do: he commands Pharaoh to let God’s people go. Not only does Pharaoh refuse, but he also places heavier burdens upon the backs of the Israelites. They must make the same number of bricks, but without the resources to fulfill the work.
The foremen of Israel, the leaders of workers who were Israelites like Moses and Aaron, discover that this new burden is the result of the confrontation that Moses and Aaron had with Pharaoh. Freedom sounded good before it had a cost. The foremen are not pleased with Moses and Aaron. “The Lord look upon you and judge, because you have made us offensive in the sight of Pharaoh and his servants, and have put a sword in their hand to kill us.” So begins the long tension between the people and the men the Lord chose to lead them.
Before he has thrown down his rod, or turned his hand leprous, or the water of the Nile to blood, Moses cries out: “O Lord, why did you ever send me?”
Why did you ever send me?
The Lord responds by reminding him that he is the God of his Fathers and that he has heard the cry of his people. More intimately, he reminds Moses that he has entrusted him with his name, which he did not do for his forefathers: I am who I am.
Taking his courage in both hands, Moses confronts the people of Israel once more. But, like the foremen, they too have had enough, “they did not listen to Moses, because of their broken spirit and their cruel bondage.” Perhaps they can sense within God’s messengers the doubts they carry themselves about the message they’ve been entrusted to tell.
The Lord assures Moses and Aaron not that Pharaoh will listen, or that the people of Israel will follow, but only that he “gave them a charge to the sons of Israel and to Pharaoh king of Egypt to bring the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt.” He assures them of his presence, of his will, and of his calling.
We cannot expect those who hold us in bondage, the world, the flesh, and the devil, to let up upon one request. Further, our attempts to live the life of freedom will have consequences upon those closest to us who depend upon us, our family, friends, brothers, and co-workers.
As we make our way to greater freedom, and as the novelty of Exodus 90 begins to wear off, how will we respond to the struggles we face on our journey? It’s okay to face doubts like our heroes did. But as we face them, we need to remember God’s promises. Will we turn to the Lord for strength, and allow him to reveal who he is to us as often as we need to hear it: I am the Lord, I appeared to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and indeed, I have appeared to you for the children who will come after you.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, remind us who we are. Help us to see ourselves as you see us. Remind us why we set out on this journey, and, especially if our strength is flagging, give us the grace to renew our commitment, to renew our why, to set out again, and to follow your Son more closely. Bring us to perfection step by step, and help us to renew today our identity, our commitment, and our reason for serving you. Place before us again the glorious image of freedom that first captivated us when we set out on this journey, and help us to renew that vision and our perseverance toward it in whatever trials we face today. We make all these prayers in the name of Jesus, your Son and our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.The Lamb of God
John 1:29-34





Brothers, welcome to Day 14 of Exodus 90.
Today is Sunday, the Lord’s Day, which we celebrate in honor of Jesus’s Resurrection from the dead. It is given to us a day of freedom, to rest within leisure from work and to enter into the highest things. In particular, we set this day aside to honor God both by going to church and also by celebrating through family, food, and activities that lead to recreation and peace. Make this day holy to honor God and enjoy your freedom, while relaxing one discipline.
In today’s Gospel, we hear John the Baptist identify Jesus as the Lamb of God, pointing back to the Passover Lamb from the Exodus story. We follow him in our worship as we come before Jesus, the Lamb who was slain, in his paschal mystery celebrated during the Mass.
Today, our spiritual guide, Fr. Boniface Hicks, will share his reflection on the Gospel reading. Let us take these words to heart, allowing the Holy Spirit to transform us into men in Christ’s likeness.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Recognize the presence of Jesus today as the Lamb of God given for your salvation. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Holy Gospel according to John
The next day [John the Baptist] saw Jesus coming toward him, and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world! This is he of whom I said, ‘After me comes a man who ranks before me, for he was before me.’ I myself did not know him; but for this I came baptizing with water, that he might be revealed to Israel.” And John bore witness, “I saw the Spirit descend as a dove from heaven and remain on him. I myself did not know him; but he who sent me to baptize with water said to me, ‘He on whom you see the Spirit descend and remain, this is he who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.’ And I have seen and have borne witness that this is the Son of God.”
Reflection
Today’s reading brings us into a powerful moment in which the voice encounters the Word, the Baptizer encounters the Lord for whom he has prepared the way, the prophet encounters the origin of all prophecy, and the man encounters his God. This encounter with Jesus Christ on the bank of the River Jordan is a sign for us as we make our own Exodus journey, also passing through the Red Sea into the desert, moving forward toward our crossing of the Jordan and into the Promised Land. Baptism becomes the way—a baptism prepared by Jesus’s own baptism.
The Baptizer went out into the desert not knowing exactly what he would find, what would happen, or how things would unfold, but with confidence that he came baptizing for the sake of this One. His ministry was for the sake of this One, to point him out when he came: Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world. That was the purpose and sole focus of John’s life, as well as his work and ministry. And it should be the same for us.
What does our life point to? Is it centered on Jesus Christ?
John knew he had encountered the Messiah through the descent of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is the one who can make us so focused on Christ, because the Holy Spirit delights when Jesus Christ is exalted in our hearts. His great desire is that Christ would be exalted in every heart. The Holy Spirit brings forth praise from our hearts and the obedience of faith within us. He transforms us because the greatest form of flattery is imitation. Acting like Christ exalts him above all else. And the best way to act like him is to become like him—to be transformed into him. This is the work of the Holy Spirit, flowing from his great desire that Christ be exalted in every heart. He is always knocking, always moving, always striving, desiring to transform us. He never pushes us beyond what we are ready for or willing to accept.
But the choice stands before us today. Will we accept? Will we allow the Holy Spirit to transform us?
And what do we mean by acting like Christ, imitating Christ, becoming like Christ? It is always along the dimension of love. He calls us to love one another as he loves us—to love more like him, to love God the Father as he loves the Father, and to love our brothers and sisters as he loves us. Sometimes that looks as small as having a bit more patience, seeing with eyes of faith that those around us are children of God, treating them as the presence of God rather than reducing them to problems or opportunities. The sensitivity of our hearts and the attention we give to our brothers and sisters can be transformed today by the power of the Holy Spirit.
There are many beautiful and powerful images of the Holy Spirit, and perhaps men are especially drawn to some of them. Scripture presents the image of the Holy Spirit as fire descending from heaven; the image of wind, which describes him as a driving, powerful force; and the image of the cloud, which is obscure, mysterious, and concealing, among others. Yet we are also presented with the Holy Spirit as a dove, which, at first glance, may not seem very manly. When we look more closely, however, we discover far more than meets the eye. A natural question when studying Scripture is: Where does this appear elsewhere? Before the dove appears in John chapter one, we first encounter it in Genesis. After the flood, Noah sends out a dove to determine if the land has dried out. When the dove does not return, Noah knows the flood has ended. In this way, the dove becomes a symbol of peace. After the great tumult of storm and flood, peace has come. The dove and the olive branch it carries become enduring signs of peace.
This is one way to receive the Holy Spirit today. Do you need peace? Is your life chaotic? Is your heart stirred up? Do you have a hard time focusing? Do you have a hard time seeing because you’re in threat response, outside of your window of tolerance, struggling to be present to others? Ask the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of peace, to descend upon you.
The dove also appears frequently in the book of Leviticus. It is the offering permitted to those who cannot afford a richer sacrifice—the offering of the poor. Here we are given permission to offer our poverty. We need not be ashamed that we lack the sacrifices of the rich, that we have not reached the highest levels of asceticism, that our prayer has been imperfect, that we have fallen short. We offer our poverty. The Holy Spirit helps us do this. In doing so, we become like Christ, who, though he was rich, became poor for our sake, so that we might become rich—rich in confidence in the Father, confident that he receives us in our poverty. Let us offer our failures: our failure to live our commitments fully, our failure to love and be present as Christ is. Let us offer these today. The Holy Spirit will help us.
The dove also features prominently in the Song of Songs, where it is a symbol of the bride. The dove appears in the midst of a beautiful love story—a romantic love that moves the heart. As men, we know this love: the attraction to the bride, the desire to protect and serve, the call to reveal her beauty by the way we treat her. The Holy Spirit helps us become like Christ, the divine Bridegroom, who comes to rescue his bride and show her how precious she is.
We are also given permission, through the image of the dove, to groan. The dove appears in the Psalms and in Isaiah because of its moaning call. And so our own groaning becomes prayer. We think of the Holy Spirit, who intercedes for us when we do not know how to pray as we ought, with inexpressible groanings. The Holy Spirit moves in us when we cry out without words—when we know only that we need. He groans with us and lifts our hearts to God.
Brothers, we are invited to gather all that has come before and step into this new week transformed into Christ, committed to loving as he loves, confident that the Holy Spirit will help us. He will bring peace into our chaos. He will receive us in our poverty. He will renew the great love story. And when we struggle and suffer, He will groan with us and lead us to a God who never fails.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, you give us all that we need to continue this Exodus journey. Thank you for calling us onto such a beautiful path—with its struggles and stumbles, its difficulties, and the ways we have already fallen short. Accept our poor offering. Renew your love within us. Strengthen our identity as beloved sons, and help us to groan when we ache for something better, something more beautiful—the Promised Land, the crossing of the Jordan, the joy of arriving home with you. We make this prayer through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Hardness of Heart
Exodus 6:28-30, 7:1-13





Brothers, welcome to Day 15 of Exodus 90.
As we enter the third week of Exodus 90, it’s important to take stock of how your journey to freedom has been progressing. There’s no such thing as a perfect Exodus, and we shouldn’t be surprised by any difficulties and disappointments that may have cropped up. We want to encourage you, brothers, more than anything else, to stay faithful to daily prayer in a silent encounter with Our Lord. He is the one who brings us to freedom, changing us from within and giving us courage to withstand Pharaoh and all the things that hold us bound. Take courage in him and renew your resolve to move forward in pursuing your “why,” together with your brothers.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Ask the Lord to soften your heart today through his loving mercy. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
On the day when the Lord spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt, the Lord said to Moses, “I am the Lord; tell Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I say to you.” But Moses said to the Lord, “Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips; how then shall Pharaoh listen to me?”
And the Lord said to Moses, “See, I make you as God to Pharaoh; and Aaron your brother shall be your prophet. You shall speak all that I command you; and Aaron your brother shall tell Pharaoh to let the sons of Israel go out of his land. But I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and though I multiply my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, Pharaoh will not listen to you; then I will lay my hand upon Egypt and bring forth my hosts, my people the sons of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great acts of judgment. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I stretch forth my hand upon Egypt and bring out the sons of Israel from among them.” And Moses and Aaron did so; they did as the Lord commanded them. Now Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron eighty-three years old, when they spoke to Pharaoh.
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, “When Pharaoh says to you, ‘Prove yourselves by working a miracle,’ then you shall say to Aaron, ‘Take your rod and cast it down before Pharaoh, that it may become a serpent.’” So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and did as the Lord commanded; Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh and his servants, and it became a serpent. Then Pharaoh summoned the wise men and the sorcerers; and they also, the magicians of Egypt, did the same by their secret arts. For every man cast down his rod, and they became serpents. But Aaron’s rod swallowed up their rods. Still Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not listen to them; as the Lord had said.
Reflection
Whether we have read the Book of Exodus closely in the past or not, one of the few things that most people remember is the hardness of Pharaoh’s heart, and how the Lord is said to harden his heart. Today, we will consider what this hardness of heart means and what it does not because we will hear about it often in the coming days.
After commanding Moses and Aaron to return to Pharaoh’s palace to announce the deliverance of his people, the Lord says, “But I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and though I multiply my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, Pharaoh will not listen to you.”
Moses and Aaron got up and went, and then said and did what the Lord had commanded. Despite all of their doubts, Moses and Aaron did what they needed to do. As we experience our own doubts, we can find consolation that our fathers have experienced their own, but we can also take inspiration from their example. They overcame their doubts, even without complete understanding, and did what was required of them. As we will see, our Lord can work wonders through men like this, men like Moses and Aaron.
Pharaoh demands a miracle on the spot, and Moses and Aaron are ready to give one. Aaron throws his rod before the royal court, and just as the Lord promises, it becomes a snake. Be it through dark art or trickery, Pharaoh’s magicians are able to replicate the wonder before Aaron’s snake devours their snakes whole.
“Still,” the Scripture reads, “Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not listen to them.”
Pharaoh’s hardened heart will become a dominant theme as we journey through the plagues over the coming week. Does Pharaoh’s hardened heart mean that he is unfree, and thus unable to repent, believe, and let God’s people go? Does it mean that God’s will functions like pagan fate, on its course over, above, and against human choice? Is Pharaoh to be pitied as a victim?
No, Pharaoh is free to make a choice for God or against him. As he makes more choices against God, it changes him, decision by decision, making it easier to say no and harder to say yes with every opportunity. Eventually, God gives Pharaoh over to his own will and passion to his great peril.
St. Gregory of Nyssa, Cappadocian Church Father from the fourth century, teaches this about the hardness of Pharaoh’s heart:
How could [Pharaoh] be condemned if he were disposed by divine constraint to be stubborn and obstinate? . . . Pharaoh is not hardened by the divine will . . . For if this were to be willed by the divine nature, then certainly any human choice would fall into line in every case, so that no distinction between virtue and vice in life could be observed. People live differently - some live uprightly in virtue while others slide into vice. One would not reasonably attribute these differences in their lives to some divine constraint which lies outside themselves. It lies within each person’s power to make this choice.
Pharaoh chose against God’s message and his messengers, and despite the interventions that have only just begun, he refuses to receive God’s Word. We can say that God hardens his heart because, as his plan is presented to him, Pharaoh hardens his heart before it, rejecting the work of God that would open it. God’s grace will not leave us alone, simply as we were before it came to us. The words of the world and the will of man harden the heart as it collapses in upon itself; the Word of God softens the heart and opens it to God.
The practice of asceticism, which we are striving to embrace throughout our Exodus, removes many of the distractions that typically keep us from silence and prayer. It’s in silence that we can allow the Word of God to gradually transform us as it makes its way deeper and deeper into our bones. Over time and with practice, we can begin to recognize the presence of the Lord who is with us and speaks in silence.
It’s in silence that we are also confronted with ourselves on the level of the heart. As silent time begins, there can be immediate relief expressed in exhale as the noise of the world and the concerns of the day begin to mute. But silence is often very challenging for men today. Burdens from the past often show up in our mind’s memory and in our body’s feeling, and anxiety about the unknowns we face today and into the future can race through our minds.
When this happens, exercise a lot of patience with yourself. It’s completely normal, and it explains why we go to such lengths to medicate our pain with the distractions of our time. This is one of the many ways we need to heed our Master’s words, to turn and become like children, who are born with a profound capacity for silence.
As we read about Pharaoh’s hardened heart over the coming weeks, and as we practice silence, let’s become aware of the crevices in our heart that have hardened over time; hardened against God, hardened against the Church, or hardened against our neighbor, be it our spouse, children, parents, bosses, or co-workers. And let’s place our hardened hearts into God’s hands each day, calling upon the Holy Spirit to conform our hearts unto, and into the Sacred Heart of Jesus, as he works his wonders before us.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, as we come before you, we are aware of the hardness in our own hearts. We recognize our resistance to change, our suspicion about where you might be directing our lives, and our guardedness toward these practices of Exodus—asceticism, prayer, and fraternity. We feel the struggle and the desire to pull back. We experience that resistance and that hardness, which can become a daily struggle. But more deeply, Lord, we do desire freedom. Please irrigate our hearts and soften them with your love. Be patient with us, and give us space to breathe. Help us settle into the practices of this Exodus, and let them slowly break up the hardened places in our hearts. Teach us to trust you and to trust your will, even when it feels hard, knowing that you will help us take each step. We surrender our hardened hearts to you, that you may soften them a bit more throughout this day. We make this prayer through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Battle of the Plagues
Exodus 7:20-25, 8:1-15





Brothers, welcome to Day 16 of Exodus 90.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Allow God to fight for you today, relying on his grace to guide you. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded; in the sight of Pharaoh and in the sight of his servants, he lifted up the rod and struck the water that was in the Nile, and all the water that was in the Nile turned to blood. And the fish in the Nile died; and the Nile became foul, so that the Egyptians could not drink water from the Nile; and there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt. But the magicians of Egypt did the same by their secret arts; so Pharaoh’s heart remained hardened, and he would not listen to them; as the Lord had said. Pharaoh turned and went into his house, and he did not lay even this to heart. And all the Egyptians dug round about the Nile for water to drink, for they could not drink the water of the Nile.
Seven days passed after the Lord had struck the Nile. Then the Lord said to Moses, “Go in to Pharaoh and say to him, ‘Thus says the Lord, “Let my people go, that they may serve me. But if you refuse to let them go, behold, I will plague all your country with frogs; the Nile shall swarm with frogs which shall come up into your house, and into your bedchamber and on your bed, and into the houses of your servants and of your people, and into your ovens and your kneading bowls; the frogs shall come up on you and on your people and on all your servants.”’” And the Lord said to Moses, “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your hand with your rod over the rivers, over the canals, and over the pools, and cause frogs to come upon the land of Egypt!’” So Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up and covered the land of Egypt. But the magicians did the same by their secret arts, and brought frogs upon the land of Egypt.
Then Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, and said, “Entreat the Lord to take away the frogs from me and from my people; and I will let the people go to sacrifice to the Lord.” Moses said to Pharaoh, “Be pleased to command me when I am to entreat, for you and for your servants and for your people, that the frogs be destroyed from you and your houses and be left only in the Nile.” And he said, “Tomorrow.” Moses said, “Be it as you say, that you may know that there is no one like the Lord our God. The frogs shall depart from you and your houses and your servants and your people; they shall be left only in the Nile.” So Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh; and Moses cried to the Lord concerning the frogs, as he had agreed with Pharaoh. And the Lord did according to the word of Moses; the frogs died out of the houses and courtyards and out of the fields. And they gathered them together in heaps, and the land stank. But when Pharaoh saw that there was a respite, he hardened his heart, and would not listen to them; as the Lord had said.
Reflection
The Creator of the universe summons the forces of nature to storm against the hard heart of Pharaoh. And so the ten plagues begin, through which we will journey over the coming week.
At the outset of the plague narrative, it’s important to step back and consider what is happening and why. Remember that the Israelites had been in Egypt for four hundred years before the story of the Exodus begins. If we consider our own country’s foundations, that’s more time than our own nations have existed in their current form. The influence of Egyptian culture was not without effect upon the minds and hearts of the people of Israel, as we are influenced by the mentality of the cultures in which we live.
The people of Israel were not only in need of physical deliverance; they were also in need of a spiritual deliverance from the demons deemed as gods by the Egyptians. In fact, the physical bondage represented the spiritual bondage from which they suffered. If they had been liberated from slavery only to remain in bondage to sin and idolatry, the Exodus would be for naught. The entire purpose of God’s liberation is to bring his people into right relationship with him, enabling Israel to live in freedom as his firstborn son among the nations.
The ten plagues are not random acts of violence. They are a methodical assault by the one true God of Israel on the most influential gods of Egypt.
Dr. John Bergsma writes, “In theological terms, this is called a theomachy. A theomachy is a divine combat, and this particular battle is between the one true God of Israel and the many gods of Egypt. Here, the all-powerful, almighty Creator of the universe challenged Egypt’s all-star lineup of earth, sky, and animal demons. And it was a beatdown of cataclysmic proportions. It was an exorcism. The ten plagues were an exorcism of Egypt, where the demonic powers that control Egypt were defeated by the mighty hand of God” (Jesus and the Jubilee, 24).
Today, the Lord confronts Hapi, the god of the Nile River, by turning the waters of Egypt to blood. And he humbles Heket, the frog-god of fertility, who reproduces beyond control while frogs overrun Egypt. Meanwhile, Pharaoh, also deemed a god, runs from the scene by turning away from the suffering of his own people and returning to the comfort of his own home.
St. Paul tells us that covetousness is a form of idolatry. Just as the Egyptians worshipped the physical forces upon which they depended, so we can idolize material forces, enabling them to dominate our minds and hearts. As we journey through the plague narrative, let’s raise before the Lord the gods that often war in our hearts, be they money, status, legacy, lust, or control. And let us day by day call upon the Lord, asking him to deliver us from the burdens these false gods place upon our shoulders.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, we experience the struggle within us, having been wounded in relationships and damaged by broken trust. We are drawn to a sense of security within our control that comes through things like money and status, legacy, and lust. As we cling to these forms of control, they become idols, and they claim absolute dominion over us—unless we can step out and trust in you again. Help us not to give in to these false idols. Fight for us. Win us over. Conquer the idols in our lives and open our hearts again to love. Open us to your divine love, which is lasting and true, a love that will never disappoint or betray. It is a love we have never fully experienced on this earth, only in bits and fragments, tastes here and there. Yet you promise it to us, and you ask us to take the risk of faith and trust. Help us to trust today. Lord, I believe; help my unbelief. And we make this prayer in the name of Jesus, your Son and our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Stipulating Conditions
Exodus 8:16-32





Brothers, welcome to Day 17 of Exodus 90.
Today, on this Wednesday, we embrace the penance of fasting and abstinence from meat as a way of uniting our hearts to the Passion of Christ. He was betrayed by one of his closest friends, and we, too, betray him when we turn away from him through sin. We make reparation for these betrayals today, seeking to gain freedom by imitating Christ’s self-sacrificing charity and obedience to the Father.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Let go of the conditions you have placed on your freedom, surrendering to God and his holy will. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Then the Lord said to Moses, “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your rod and strike the dust of the earth, that it may become gnats throughout all the land of Egypt.’” And they did so; Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and struck the dust of the earth, and there came gnats on man and beast; all the dust of the earth became gnats throughout all the land of Egypt. The magicians tried by their secret arts to bring forth gnats, but they could not. So there were gnats on man and beast. And the magicians said to Pharaoh, “This is the finger of God.” But Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not listen to them; as the Lord had said.
Then the Lord said to Moses, “Rise up early in the morning and wait for Pharaoh, as he goes out to the water, and say to him, ‘Thus says the Lord, “Let my people go, that they may serve me. Else, if you will not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms of flies on you and your servants and your people, and into your houses; and the houses of the Egyptians shall be filled with swarms of flies, and also the ground on which they stand. But on that day I will set apart the land of Goshen, where my people dwell, so that no swarms of flies shall be there; that you may know that I am the Lord in the midst of the earth. Thus I will put a division between my people and your people. By tomorrow shall this sign be.”’” And the Lord did so; there came great swarms of flies into the house of Pharaoh and into his servants’ houses, and in all the land of Egypt the land was ruined by reason of the flies.
Then Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, and said, “Go, sacrifice to your God within the land.” But Moses said, “It would not be right to do so; for we shall sacrifice to the Lord our God offerings abominable to the Egyptians. If we sacrifice offerings abominable to the Egyptians before their eyes, will they not stone us? We must go three days’ journey into the wilderness and sacrifice to the Lord our God as he will command us.” So Pharaoh said, “I will let you go, to sacrifice to the Lord your God in the wilderness; only you shall not go very far away. Make entreaty for me.” Then Moses said, “Behold, I am going out from you and I will pray to the Lord that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, tomorrow; only let not Pharaoh deal falsely again by not letting the people go to sacrifice to the Lord.” So Moses went out from Pharaoh and prayed to the Lord. And the Lord did as Moses asked, and removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people; not one remained. But Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also, and did not let the people go.
Reflection
There is only one Lord, and all else must fade before him, sooner or later. Making himself known to the rebellious Egyptians, the Lord continues his assault on their gods. Today, we read about the third and fourth plagues, the swarming of Egypt with insects, gnats, and then flies.
After only three plagues, the magicians of Egypt accepted their defeat, saying to Pharaoh, “This is the finger of God.” Pharaoh had previously relied upon his sorcerers to justify his rebellion, believing them capable of matching the works of the God of Israel. The magicians no longer stand at his side as they recognize and fear the almighty power of the one true God of Israel.
From this point forward, Pharaoh will rely exclusively upon himself as he refuses to let God’s people go. With the onset of the flies in the fourth plague, we start to see Pharaoh’s defiance weaken, perhaps because he stands alone in his rebellion. Moses and Aaron have consistently asked to go a three days’ journey into the wilderness with their people and livestock to throw a festival to the Lord.
Pharaoh begins to grant conditional release. It reads rather pathetically: Fine, you can worship your God, but you must sacrifice on your own land and not leave from here.
Moses knows the people of Egypt, their mentality, and their ways from within, for he lived within their courts. The sacrifices the Lord demands will violate Egyptian sensibilities and warrant death. Most importantly, Moses knows it to be unwise and irreverent to place conditions upon God. The bargaining continues: Fine, Pharaoh says, you can leave your land, but you must only go a short distance away from me, not a three days’ journey.
Having done everything that Moses was commanded by God, Moses takes on the role of an intercessor even for his enemy and asks God to let up on the fourth plague. Finally free from the annoying insects of the third and fourth plagues, Pharaoh changes his mind, hardens his heart, and refuses again to let God’s people go.
The conditions of Pharaoh do not end here. In future chapters, Pharaoh will further constrict God’s command, saying to the people of Israel that they may go, but without their families or livestock.
Brothers, yesterday we asked the Lord to soften the hardness of our hearts with his Word, and to name the gods that often sway us into men we are not nor wish to become. As pathetic as the concessions of Pharaoh may seem as we hear them, do we not do the same thing?
Instead of rejecting sin and the circumstances that lead us into darkness time and again, we make partial amendments of our lives. And instead of believing that freedom in Christ is possible, a freedom that blossoms into love, we succumb to the discouragement that we will never be free. Like Pharaoh, we teeter-totter, we go halfway, when the Lord commands us to go all-in in our worship of him.
What conditions have you placed upon yourself, or have others placed upon you that you have believed, that need to be broken? What keeps you from worshiping the Lord as a son who is perfectly loved, from the worship that sets us free?
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, you lead us so kindly and gently to deeper conversion and to greater trust in you. Even with Pharaoh, as you worked to soften his heart, you gave him opportunities to turn away from his hardness and to be softened by love. Yet he reached a point where he began placing conditions on what he would allow you to do and on what he would allow the people of Israel to do. There is a Pharaoh in each of us as well. He wants to place conditions—to trust you, but not too much; to worship you, but not too much; to take a risk, but not to go too far. Help us first to notice those conditions and to explore where they came from, often from our own woundedness, from our sins, or from the ways others have hurt us. Those conditions are attempts to limit pain and to keep some semblance of control in our lives. Help us to see the origins of that pain and to bring healing and reconciliation within us, so that we might let go of those conditions and worship you unconditionally, as you deserve, responding to your unconditional love for us. And we make this prayer through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Back to Dust
Exodus 9:1-12





Brothers, welcome to Day 18 of Exodus 90.
Today is the Day of Prayer for the Legal Protection of Unborn Children. We offer our prayer and sacrifices today for the most vulnerable. God had compassion on the Israelites even as their baby boys were killed by Pharaoh. On behalf of all unborn children and their mothers, we pray and work for the sanctity of all life as a gift from God, an expression of his love and desire for communion.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Humble yourself before your Maker today. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Then the Lord said to Moses, “Go in to Pharaoh, and say to him, ‘Thus says the Lord, the God of the Hebrews, “Let my people go, that they may serve me. For if you refuse to let them go and still hold them, behold, the hand of the Lord will fall with a very severe plague upon your cattle which are in the field, the horses, the donkeys, the camels, the herds, and the flocks. But the Lord will make a distinction between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt, so that nothing shall die of all that belongs to the sons of Israel.”’” And the Lord set a time, saying, “Tomorrow the Lord will do this thing in the land.” And the next day the Lord did this thing; all the cattle of the Egyptians died, but of the cattle of the sons of Israel not one died. And Pharaoh sent, and behold, not one of the cattle of the Israelites was dead. But the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go.
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, “Take handfuls of ashes from the kiln, and let Moses throw them toward heaven in the sight of Pharaoh. And it shall become fine dust over all the land of Egypt, and become boils breaking out in sores on man and beast throughout all the land of Egypt.” So they took ashes from the kiln, and stood before Pharaoh, and Moses threw them toward heaven, and it became boils breaking out in sores on man and beast. And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils, for the boils were upon the magicians and upon all the Egyptians. But the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he did not listen to them; as the Lord had spoken to Moses.
Reflection
Egypt must learn its place before the Maker and Lord of the universe, to whom all creatures and peoples belong.
The fifth and sixth plagues wreak havoc upon rebellious Pharaoh and great suffering upon his people. The death of Egypt’s livestock turns personal with boils breaking out upon the skin of all Egyptian people, including Pharaoh’s magicians. Pharaoh’s disobedience intimately affects those he leads, his sin manifesting in the pain of those who follow him.
While the Egyptians suffer greatly, everything belonging to the Israelites is spared: “not one cattle of the Israelites was dead.” This is because the people of Israel had been set apart: “I will set apart the land of Goshen, where my people dwell . . . that you may know that I am the Lord in the midst of the earth. Thus I will put a division between my people and your people.” The word “holy” means to be set apart. God does not simply spare his people; he dedicates them to himself and his service.
Moses is instructed to take ashes in his hands, to throw them high above him in the air, for it to settle down as fine dust upon the land, as Egyptian skin deforms into boils.
This is not the first time we encounter the image of dust in the Bible. Recall that it was out of dust that man was fashioned by God on the sixth day of creation. Bishop Erik Varden, the Bishop of Trondheim in Norway, writes in his book Chastity: The Reconciliation of the Senses, “Origen had this aspect of creation in mind when he observed that the Lord having made each other part of the universe by means of a word - ‘God said . . . and there was’ - on the sixth day made man, uniquely, with his hands. ‘Then the Lord God formed man of dust from the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living being’ (Genesis 2:6). And we will hear the words ‘Remember, man, you are dust, and to dust you will return’ spoken over us in a few weeks time during the liturgy for Ash Wednesday as the sign of the cross is formed with ash upon our foreheads.”
In the narrative of the plagues, we see a reversal, a subversion of the creation account. The Lord first formed man from dust, but now he commands Moses to throw dust in the air as suffering breaks out upon the people of Egypt, forcing them back to their humble roots. He had fashioned man in his hands, and now he brings discipline to those who forgot their identity as his creatures through his mighty arm. The same arm that destroys also protects.
The God of Israel is Almighty. In the face of Christ, God is revealed to be Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. God is a loving Father who sent his Son to save us and offer us divine life through the indwelling of the Holy Spirit in our souls. To see the world with a Catholic vision, we have to hold both of these truths together in our minds and hearts, as challenging as that can be at times.
We all carry images of God around based on our experience, especially based on our experience of our own fathers and father figures. Many of our thoughts and feelings about God do not actually correspond to who God is revealed to be in the Bible. And that’s not something to be ashamed of, as it’s completely normal. Just as God slowly revealed himself to his people as he rescued them from slavery, so he draws us to himself and heals us of our misconceptions.
Parts of us can view God as a tyrant, demanding a slavish servitude that makes us anxious when we think about him. But this kind of nervous anxiety is not the fear that is the beginning of wisdom, but the result of a false image of God and our relation to him. We are not able to see his love, which so often operates in hidden ways as he patiently draws us to himself.
At other moments, we may feel God to be absent, nowhere to be found when we need him the most. God transcends the world, as we know through faith, but we ourselves live in the material world. Though born estranged from him through original sin, he breathed us into life and sustains us at every moment, unfolding his plan for us as his sons while he guides us to maturity.
Other parts of us may not know the experience of God’s love. We may feel numb within, unable to discern his presence and hear his voice.
How, then, can we begin to address our false images and see God as he is revealed to be?
Fr. Boniface Hicks writes in his book Personal Prayer: A Guide to Receiving the Father’s Love, “If our images of God or even of Mary or Jesus are troubled by painful experiences we have had with people in our lives, the Lord will heal these as we turn to Him and will correct our distortions. A good way to facilitate this is to just reach behind and beneath our wounds and to simply press ourselves and our wounds against His wounds. Our ideas of God that are not God will melt away in the fire of His love” (24).
Your fraternity is a sacred space to bring to light the images of God you carry, which you’re uncertain about, to gain the wisdom, perspective, and encouragement of other men who are journeying along with you to support you. And we need to persevere in coming before God in silence, day after day, consistently over time, to connect with who he really is. He will transform where our images fail to correspond to who he is revealed to be in Christ.
Let us pray
Heavenly Father, you made us out of love, forming us with your own hands from the dust of the earth. With such care and intention, you formed us and made us who we are, and you have accompanied us every moment of our lives. As we have suffered wounds that have sometimes distorted our vision of you and confused us about who you are and where you are in our lives, we can struggle mightily to live out the call you have given us. As we discover those anxious and wounded places in our hearts, we press them against the wounds of your Son. You know our pain. You understand our confusion. You have chosen to experience it from the inside by sending Jesus to become one with us and to share in all of our suffering. Help us to find healing and a path forward. We ask all this in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Fear of the Lord
Exodus 9:22-35





Brothers, welcome to Day 19 of Exodus 90.
On this Friday, we unite our fasting and abstinence from meat to the Cross of Christ. He is the eternal Son of the Father, who teaches us how to live as loving sons, enjoying freedom of spirit through detachment from the world. Offer your prayer and sacrifice today for all your loved ones and in pursuit of your “why.”
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Recognize the Lord as your Maker today and humble yourself before him in holy fear. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
And the Lord said to Moses, “Stretch forth your hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man and beast and every plant of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.” Then Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven; and the Lord sent thunder and hail, and fire ran down to the earth. And the Lord rained hail upon the land of Egypt; there was hail, and fire flashing continually in the midst of the hail, very heavy hail, such as had never been in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation. The hail struck down everything that was in the field throughout all the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and the hail struck down every plant of the field, and shattered every tree of the field. Only in the land of Goshen, where the sons of Israel were, there was no hail.
Then Pharaoh sent, and called Moses and Aaron, and said to them, “I have sinned this time; the Lord is in the right, and I and my people are in the wrong. Entreat the Lord; for there has been enough of this thunder and hail; I will let you go, and you shall stay no longer.” Moses said to him, “As soon as I have gone out of the city, I will stretch out my hands to the Lord; the thunder will cease, and there will be no more hail, that you may know that the earth is the Lord’s. But as for you and your servants, I know that you do not yet fear the Lord God.” (The flax and the barley were ruined, for the barley was in the ear and the flax was in bud. But the wheat and the spelt were not ruined, for they are late in coming up.) So Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and stretched out his hands to the Lord; and the thunder and the hail ceased, and the rain no longer poured upon the earth. But when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunder had ceased, he sinned yet again, and hardened his heart, he and his servants. So the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the sons of Israel go; as the Lord had spoken through Moses.
Reflection
In the seventh plague, the Lord returns to the elements of nature to express his power and authority over the gods of Egypt and the pride of Pharaoh. The detail about the timing of the wheat and the spelt suggest that the Exodus occurred in midwinter, in January or February.
The hailstorm from heaven devastated Egypt, “such as had never been in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.” Everything in Egypt was pummelled by this divine act.
We have previously noted that Pharaoh sought to place conditions upon the release of God’s people. Rather than accept a conditional release, the Lord punishes Pharaoh and his people for his hardening heart. We’ve come to expect this pattern, plague after plague. But after the seventh, something new happens. Pharaoh apologizes to Moses and Aaron, admitting that he “sinned this time.”
Moses sees straight through his half-heartedness, and says, “You do not yet fear the Lord God.” Perhaps the gods of Egypt played such games, but the God of Israel does not. He refuses to be taken advantage of, and he does not allow himself to be made an instrument in any man’s endeavors or plans.
In his book Entering the Twofold Mystery: On Christian Conversion, Bishop Erik Varden says this to the monks that were under his care when he was the Abbot at Mt. Saint Bernard’s in England:
“It is futile to pursue religion as a means to happiness - even as it is futile to pursue it as a means to anything else. If there is truth in religion (and you and I have staked our lives on there being such truth, an absolute, infinitely desirable truth), it is an end in itself. To instrumentalize it will be frustrating and destructive.” (147)
When you look out into the world today, people do all kinds of things in God’s name, assuming that he is on their side against their adversaries. We see this in the political forum, especially. We presume, finite creatures that we are, to know the infinite mind and timing of Almighty God. This is dangerous territory for a man, and does not follow the path of wisdom.
The Prophet Isaiah expresses this truth iconically: “For my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are your ways my ways, says the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways and my thoughts than your thoughts” (Isaiah, 55:8-9).
What Pharaoh lacks, and what we must cultivate in our souls and hearts, is fear of the Lord. The fear of the Lord is not a psychological nervousness before a false image of God. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a humble wonder and awe before his holy presence.
A powerful illustration that can help us visualize this fear of the Lord is the kind of fear a father or mother has when they hold a newborn baby in their arms. They wrap the child up, hold them with great care, supporting their head in their hand, and always remember that they are vulnerable, especially in the earliest days, and “fear” for their well-being. They are careful and considerate in their gestures to protect their child from accidents or any form of harm.
A proper fear of the Lord is like this. It’s the fear that we will become separated from the holy presence of God and lose the inheritance we’ve received as his sons by sin. Our inheritance is not one we have earned, but one we have been chosen to receive from before all eternity by our Good Father. But it is one we can squander if we do not cherish and protect it. A proper fear of the Lord humbles us before God. It helps us to remember that we are dependent upon the Lord to establish us in the truth of our identity as his sons, to provide for our needs and those of our families, and to protect us from losing our place in His kingdom.
It is fascinating to watch the new openness to the Christian faith we are experiencing in parts of the world today, including the United States. And it is encouraging to see the rise in religiosity among young men. When we started Exodus 90 ten years ago, the trends were in the opposite direction and declining, and in many ways, this is what we’ve been praying for and trying to play our part in bringing it about in society. The faith feels more and more “in-season,” which is a beautiful thing.
In this time especially, we need to cultivate a proper fear of the Lord and the virtue of humility, by which the seeds of faith may come to full maturity in us. The mentality of the world is without principle and fickle. What is on-trend, in-season today will be out of season tomorrow.
Remember the actions of Pharaoh. Our God is not an instrument to be used to personal advantage or the advancement of our opinion. He, the Almighty, is to be feared, lovingly and properly, as his sons. His timing and his ways are not our own. Allow him to lead you.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, we are profoundly grateful for your love that fights for us, that freed Israel from Egypt, and that frees us from sin and death. As you free us, we desire to worship you—not as a means to any other end, but because you are worth it. We worship you because you are worth it. As we make these acts of worship today through our asceticism, our prayer, and our faithfulness in fraternity, we keep you as the end in mind for everything else we do. Help us to be faithful. Even as we see positive trends in religion around us, let us not act because it makes us popular or helps us fit in. Instead, continue to purify our motives so that our love for you may be unconditional. Help us to hold this precious treasure—so easily broken by our fickle and wandering hearts—with fear and reverence. Teach us to hold sacred and precious the treasure of our relationship with you, and not to lose the opportunity for any act of honor and worship we can make today. We make this prayer through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.The Courage of Fathers
Exodus 10:1-20





Brothers, welcome to Day 20 of Exodus 90.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Take a stand today for the Lord and be ready to serve others. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
“Then the Lord said to Moses, “Go in to Pharaoh; for I have hardened his heart and the heart of his servants, that I may show these signs of mine among them, and that you may tell in the hearing of your son and of your sons’s son how I have made sport of the Egyptians and what signs I have done among them; that you may know that I am the Lord.”
So Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh, and said to him, “Thus says the Lord, the God of the Hebrews, ‘How long will you refuse to humble yourself before me? Let my people go, that they may serve me. For if you refuse to let my people go, behold, tomorrow I will bring locusts into your country, and they shall cover the face of the land, so that no one can see the land; and they shall eat what is left to you after the hail, and they shall eat every tree of yours which grows in the field, and they shall fill your houses, and the houses of all your servants and of all the Egyptians; as neither your fathers nor your grandfathers have seen, from the day they came on earth to this day.’” Then he turned and went out from Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh’s servants said to him, “How long shall this man be a snare to us? Let the men go, that they may serve the Lord their God; do you not yet understand that Egypt is ruined?” So Moses and Aaaron were brought back to Pharaoh; and he said to them, “Go, serve the Lord your God; but who are to go?” And Moses said, “We will go with our young and our old; we will go with our sons and daughters and with our flocks and herds, for we must hold a feast to the Lord.” And he said to them, “The Lord be with you, if ever I let you and your little ones go! Look, you have some evil purpose in mind. No! Go, the men among you, and serve the Lord, for that is what you desire.” And they were driven out from Pharaoh’s presence.
Then the Lord said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come upon the land of Egypt, and eat every plant in the land, all that the hail has left.” So Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the Lord brought an east wind upon the land all that day and all that night; and when it was morning the east wind had brought the locusts. And the locusts came up over all the land of Egypt, and settled on the whole country of Egypt, such a dense swarm of locusts as had never been before, nor ever shall be again. For they covered the face of the whole land, so that the land was darkened, and they ate all the plants in the land and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left; not a green thing remained, neither tree nor plant of the field, through all the land of Egypt. Then Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron in haste, and said, “I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you. Now therefore, forgive my sin, I beg you, only this once, and entreat the Lord your God only to remove this death from me.” So he went out from Pharaoh, and entreated the Lord. And the Lord turned a very strong west wind, which lifted the locusts and drove them into the Red Sea; not a single locust was left in all the country of Egypt. But the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he did not let the children of Israel go.
Reflection
The plagues entail a process of learning–learning who the Lord is and who we are in relation to him. Like the Egyptians, we often can be slow to learn from our trials. The Lord has already brought frogs, flies, and gnats upon the Egyptians. The final animal plague comes upon Egypt in the form of locusts.
We mentioned yesterday how the plague pattern, which we have come to recognize, was disrupted by the insincere admission of Pharaoh’s sin. Today’s plague also has a distinctive characteristic that is unique among the plagues. The Lord says that he makes a sport of Egypt, a noteworthy turn of phrase, so that the Israelite men may tell their “sons and their sons’ sons.” You could almost imagine the Lord saying that he gave the Egyptians so many chances, but since they wouldn’t listen, they’d better be ready for what comes next. It’s not just a lesson for Egypt, in their almost comical stubbornness, but also for God’s people to recognize God’s greatness. The locusts that come are of such volume that “neither your fathers nor your grandfathers have seen, from the day they came on earth to this day.” These divine acts are exceptional. Past generations had not seen anything like them, and they were to be passed on for remembrance. Why?
Robert Cardinal Sarah once said to us, “Every one of us must go through the Exodus experience to leave behind the slavery of Egypt, and to encounter God in the silence of the wilderness.” The Exodus is not a story in a book. It is a journey that is alive and effective in the divinely inspired Word. We have to learn the same lessons of identity and transformation today. That’s why it has been passed down, and why we must continue to pass it on to future generations.
Pharaoh’s advisors advise him poorly, and once again attempt a conditional release of God’s people, even though Egypt has been destroyed in plain sight as they speak. When Pharaoh tries to tell Moses that what he really desires is for the men to worship the Lord in the wilderness, Moses stands up for all of his people: “We will go with our young and our old; we will go with our sons and daughters.”
There are a few practical lessons we can draw from today’s scripture.
First, it is not only the men who are called to worship the Lord, but all of his people. The Lord desires our whole family to worship him. As you take up greater intentionality in your spiritual life, consider spiritual practices that you can establish within the culture of your home. Perhaps a family rosary each week, blessing your children with the sign of the cross before bed, and making time for your spouse to have silent prayer time.
Second, like Moses, we must have the courage to stand up to the Pharaohs that take advantage of our wives, children, and those that the Lord entrusts to our care. We see how the Lord fathers his people in the Book of Exodus. The Lord hears their cry, and he engages directly in their struggle by fighting the demonic gods of Egypt head-on. Many men struggle with passivity today. A passive man fails to engage in the circumstances and challenges of daily life. It is not nearly enough to provide for the material or financial needs of your family or to get everyone to Mass on Sundays. God has chosen you as the head of your household and your spouse as the beating heart. Like the Lord and his servant Moses, we must be completely present, fully engaged, and willing to stand up to the forces of evil that seek to compromise our families.
Third, the Lord makes it clear that he wants the wonders he has worked in the Exodus to be passed on: “that you may tell in the hearing of your son and of your son’s son how I have made sport of the Egyptians and what signs I have done among them; that you may know that I am the Lord.” As men, it is essential that we fully embrace our role as spiritual fathers. A spiritual father passes on the faith to those in his care by recalling the stories of the Bible as it makes sense in the course of daily life, and more intimately than that, sharing how the Lord is working on a daily basis in your own experience. There is no greater influence on whether or not your children will practice the faith as adults than you.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, thank you for the powerful way in which you delivered our forefathers from the evil that oppressed them. You delivered Israel from Egypt and brought them into an exodus in which they encountered you in the silence of the wilderness. Help us also to be delivered from our enemies and to encounter you in the silence of sacrifice, penance, and prayer. As we go out from the forces that enslave us and into a new beginning, a new way of life, guide us step by step. As we do so, help us to bring along those you have entrusted to our care. Help us to stand against the Pharaohs that continue to pursue us—not only us, but also those you have placed under our protection. And help us to keep telling the story of your wonders, your greatness, and your love. Make us fathers after your own heart. We make this prayer in the name of your Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Follow the Lord
Matthew 4:12-23





Brothers, welcome to Day 21 of Exodus 90.
Today we celebrate Sunday as the day of rest given to us by the Lord. When God drew his people out of slavery, it was for the purpose of communion with him, serving him through divine worship, and enjoying his rest. Make this day holy to honor God and enjoy your freedom, while relaxing one discipline.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Recognize the presence of Jesus today as the Lamb of God given for your salvation. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Holy Gospel according to Matthew
Now when he heard that John had been arrested, he withdrew into Galilee; and leaving Nazareth he went and dwelt in Caperna-um by the sea, in the territory of Zebulun and Naphtali, that what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled: “The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, toward the sea, across the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles—the people who sat in darkness have seen a great light, and for those who sat in the region and shadow of death light has dawned.” From that time Jesus began to preach, saying, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.”
As he walked by the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon who is called Peter and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen. And he said to them, “Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.” Immediately they left their nets and followed him. And going on from there he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets, and he called them. Immediately they left the boat and their father, and followed him. And he went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the gospel of the kingdom and healing every disease and every infirmity among the people.
Reflection
From this powerful Gospel at the beginning of Jesus’s public ministry, several points stand out to us that are particularly relevant for this great journey we are making as Exodus men. This journey of 90 days consists in prayer, fraternity, and asceticism. Two points stand out in regard to fraternity.
First, we begin this Gospel with the acknowledgement of John’s imprisonment. “Now when Jesus heard that John had been arrested, he withdrew into Galilee; and leaving Nazareth he went and dwelt in Capernaum by the sea.” Jesus withdrew when he heard of his cousin’s death. Although they had not spent a lot of time together, they were truly collaborators in ministry. John was the voice that proclaimed Jesus, and Jesus had already sanctified him in the womb at the encounter of their mothers in the Visitation.
John had lived for Jesus, and Jesus took the baton from John, as John was the one who cried out, “Behold the Lamb of God,” and baptized Jesus. John’s love for Jesus, John’s whole life directed to the mission of Jesus, could not help but steal his heart, which was pure and divine, and he loved his cousin. There was fraternity there. There was joy there. There was support there. There was blessing and grace there, and there was pain in the loss.
If we really enter into fraternity with others, we will suffer. The suffering of my brother becomes my own, and so there is more suffering in fraternity. But at the same time, suffering shared is half the suffering, and so there is less suffering in fraternity. If we all hold each other’s suffering together, if we all enter in, walk side by side, listen, and love, if we pay attention to one another’s hearts, if we care for each other’s hearts, we will bear more. The struggles of our brothers, the failures of our brothers, the difficulties our brothers face become our own, and they become blessed by being shared in love. And all of this is shared with Christ.
Jesus spoke of divine encounters in the last judgment. He said, “I was hungry and you gave me food, thirsty and you gave me drink, sick and you visited me, naked and you clothed me.” Jesus speaks of the encounter that happens when we see the needs of our brothers, share them, and provide what we can for them. Jesus is present with us in the one who is poor, in the one who is serving.
Therefore, the first point we can draw is from fraternity. We can enter in and double our efforts; we can recommit ourselves with eyes open: “I’m in it with you. I’m depending on you. I’m sharing my heart with you. I’m supporting you.” We see this exemplified: Jesus doesn’t take this loss and then withdraw into himself. In fact, he goes right out and calls two more brothers, two brothers who will share his sufferings. In fact, two sets of brothers: Simon and Andrew, and John and James. These brothers would become his close collaborators. He would suffer their confusion and their fears, and they would suffer his betrayal and his death. They enter in as real brothers and suffer together, and they are victorious together as the victory of Christ becomes their victory as well.
That’s the other side of it that we experience in fraternity. Each other’s victories become our victories, and so our joy is also multiplied. A joy shared is twice the joy.
Another point that stands out for us, so dear to our hearts as Exodus men, is the description of these people among whom Jesus first walks. Quoting from the prophet Isaiah, we hear, “The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, toward the sea, across the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles—the people who sat in darkness have seen a great light, and for those who sat in the region and shadow of death light has dawned.”
Take note of the word “sat.” They sat in darkness, and they sat in the region and shadow of death. That seems like they’ve accepted it, and in a way, they’ve given up. When we’re moving, when we’re standing, we’re facing the difficulty. When we sit, it’s a kind of giving up, giving in, settling in for the long haul. They were in darkness, and they had nowhere to go. Maybe having exhausted themselves, they had nothing left to do but sit in it. They sat in darkness, and they sat in the shadow of death, listless and directionless.
In our fraternities, we find that in ourselves and in each other. Having tried so hard, we find ourselves with nothing left but to sit in it. What do we need?
Now, a two-fold movement happens. The first, love draws close. Jesus walks among them. “The kingdom of heaven is at hand.” Victory draws close to defeat and is ready to lift it up. As we sit in darkness and the shadow of death, life, love, and light come down to us in the person of Jesus, who does not relegate us to the realms of the dead, who does not leave us lost in the darkness, but who comes to us and extends his hand.
That’s the first part of the light that emerges: love initiates a new path, a redemption. The second part is the instruction of Jesus: “Repent.” He has brought the kingdom of heaven at hand in his very person, and as he looks into our eyes, he can say to us, “Repent.” In the Greek, it is metanoia, metanoete: turn around, change your interior direction, your interior disposition. What he’s saying to us is not “Try harder, you haven’t tried hard enough.” He’s saying, “Now I’m here. Now it’s possible. Now you can move in the direction that you most deeply want to move; now you can get up with me; now you can walk with me. You don’t have to sit in the darkness any longer: I am here, I am with you, I see you, and I love you, and together we walk. Repent. You can do it. Stand up. Let’s go. You’ve got this.” This is the word of encouragement that he gives us, and it is truly a light.
Repentance sometimes feels like a heavy condemnation: “You’re doing it wrong. You aren’t good enough. Try harder.” But that’s not the repentance that Jesus gives us. It’s not the repentance that Peter celebrates in Acts 11 when he recounts how the Holy Spirit descended upon the family of Cornelius: “And the disciples rejoiced and they said, ‘Then to the Gentiles too has God given the gift of life-giving repentance’” (v. 18). Repentance is life-giving when it is an opportunity to start again, to set out again.
Perhaps at this point, just a couple weeks into our Exodus journey, it’s a good word for us too: begin again. Today we start. Let’s set out together. Love has come close to us. No matter how many failures, no matter how much loss, no matter how much sadness and suffering, we move together. Today, let us get up and follow Christ.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, in your love for us, you sent your Son, who entered into our darkness and shares our suffering and sadness in his decision to become our brother, to stand with us, to walk with us, to show us the way. He shares our sufferings and our sadness, and he calls us to share in his and each other's. Help us to begin again today, to set out with new confidence, courage, and hope on our Exodus journey. We ask this in his name, Jesus our Lord. Amen.
And may Almighty God bless you, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. Amen.Spiritual Darkness
Exodus 10:21-23; 11:1-10





Brothers, welcome to Day 22 of Exodus 90.
As we begin the fourth week, we want to make a brief observation on where we are in our journey. The next week can truly set the tone of our Exodus experience this year. By now, New Year’s resolutions have mostly faded from the world around us, and we are still weeks away from the start of Lent on Ash Wednesday, when all the faithful will join us in a prayer and penitential preparation for Easter. These in-between weeks can be challenging. As we make our way through the plagues, we have read time and again of Pharaoh’s hardened heart and half-heartedness as he tries to place conditions upon the freedom of God’s people. Let’s not place conditions upon ourselves, and the men we can become; let’s not go halfway during our Exodus. Let’s strive to go all-in, like Moses, and be filled with hope as we read about God’s dramatic and iconic deliverance of his people this week.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Pray that the Lord may shine his light into the dark places of our hearts today. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Then the Lord said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand toward heaven that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, a darkness to be felt.” So Moses stretched out his hand toward heaven, and there was thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days; they did not see one another, nor did any rise from his place for three days; but all the sons of Israel had light where they dwelt.
The Lord said to Moses, “Yet one plague more I will bring upon Pharaoh and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go from here; when he lets you go, he will drive you away completely. Speak now in the hearing of the people, that they ask, every man of his neighbor and every woman of her neighbor, jewelry of silver and of gold.” And the Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover, the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh’s servants and in the sight of the people.
And Moses said, “Thus says the Lord: About midnight I will go forth in the midst of Egypt; and all the first-born in the land of Egypt shall die, from the first-born of Pharaoh who sits upon his throne, even to the first-born of the maidservant who is behind the mill; and all the firstborn of the cattle. And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there has never been, nor ever shall be again. But against any of the sons of Israel, either man or beast, not a dog shall growl; that you may know that the Lord makes a distinction between the Egyptians and Israel. And all these your servants shall come down to me, and bow down to me, saying, ‘Get you out, and all the people who follow you.’ And after that I will go out.” And he went out from Pharaoh in hot anger. Then the Lord said to Moses, “Pharaoh will not listen to you; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.” Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh; and the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he did not let the sons of Israel go out of his land.
The Word of the Lord Thanks be to God
Reflection
Darkness is the most fitting expression of sin, which turns us away from God’s divine light.
The Lord blots out the sun for three days in the ninth plague. In so doing, he takes on the sun god Amon-re, who was one of the most powerful gods of Egypt. He was likened to Zeus from Greek mythology. Amon-re, it was said, brought himself into existence, but with the darkness lasting for three full days, signifying death, he was defeated by the Lord.
Remember that the Lord placed a division between the people of Israel and those of Egypt. As the Egyptians suffered the plagues, the Israelites were unaffected. We can imagine how insects could consume Egyptian land, while the land of the Israelites may be spared. But how can the Lord blot out the sun in Egypt, while the Israelites go about their day in broad daylight?
St. Gregory of Nyssa, in his Life of Moses, comes to our aid. He offers a powerful observation that enters into this phenomenon spiritually, which is useful for our own journey. He writes, “consider the air which is darkened to the Egyptians’ eyes by the rod while to the Hebrews’ it is illuminated by the sun. . . . It was not some constraining power from above that caused the one to be found in darkness and the other in light, but we men have in ourselves, in our own nature and by our own choice, the causes of light or of darkness, since we place ourselves in whichever sphere we wish to be” (Life of Moses, 72).
God is limitless freedom, and having been stamped with his image, every man is invited to live according to this design or not. The freedom of man is the key to understanding the plague narrative. Moses chooses to freely obey God’s command, while Pharaoh chooses to harden his heart against him again and again. We choose the sphere in which we want to live, either covered in darkness like the Egyptians or to live in the light of the Israelites. My brothers, will we choose the sphere of darkness, or will we surrender to the light, which is the sphere of freedom, trusting in God’s designs?
The plagues we have been reading are a dramatic account of how the Lord will take the world and its elements into his powerful hands to deliver his people from spiritual and physical bondage. The Lord recklessly goes to any height, depth, or length to Father his people and set them free from the demonic forces of Egypt. Like the story of the Exodus, the plague narrative is not only something that happened thousands of years ago. The plagues happen today, all around us, and even within us.
St. Gregory writes, “As we follow closely the reading of the text at hand, let us not draw the conclusion that these distresses upon those who deserved them came directly from God, but rather let us observe that each man makes his own plagues when through his own free will he inclines toward these painful experiences” (Life of Moses, 74).
While the life of virtue and vice can seem indistinguishable on the surface, this is not so on the level of the heart. No one gets away with sin for long, and the plagues come in their wake. When we find ourselves in darkness through sin, let’s repent and seek the Lord’s forgiveness in the sacrament of penance and reconciliation. And assured of the Lord’s forgiveness, and without giving in to discouragement, begin again.
Pharaoh pathetically attempts his last restriction upon the Lord’s people today, that they may go but now without their cattle. Moses boldly proclaims: “Our cattle also must go with us; not a hoof shall be left behind, for we must take of them to serve the Lord our God, and we do not know with what we must serve the Lord until we arrive there.” We do not always know where the path of the Lord will lead us, and what sacrifices will be required along our way to eternity. But, like Moses, we can be sure that we have the grace we need to take the next step today. The next step is right in front of us. May we choose against all the paths that lead us back to darkness, and venture with the Lord into the limitless freedom of the sphere of the light.
Nunc coepi, is a powerful Latin phrase which means “now I begin.” My brothers, nunc coepimus, “now we begin.”
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, you allowed the Egyptians to experience the darkness ultimately brought about by their own choices and by the false gods they worshiped. You did this not merely to hurt them or to take vengeance, but to show them that there is a greater God—a God of light—who calls for different choices and to whom you desired to draw them: yourself. Help us today to make the choices that open light within our hearts, illumine our minds, and draw us closer to you. Help us to let go of our limitations, our narrow vision, and our false gods, and to place all of our trust in you. Help us to take just one step today, knowing that you will show us the next step each day as we draw a little closer to you. We make this prayer through Christ your Son, our Lord, the light of the world and the light of our lives. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.The Passover
Exodus 12:1-15





Brothers, welcome to Day 23 of Exodus 90.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Pass over from death to life by accepting the blood of Jesus in prayer today. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
The Lord said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, “This month shall be for you the beginning of months; it shall be the first month of the year for you. Tell all the congregation of Israel that on the tenth day of this month they shall take every man a lamb according to their fathers’ houses, a lamb for a household; and if the household is too small for a lamb, then a man and his neighbor next to his house shall take according to the number of persons; according to what each can eat you shall make your count for the lamb. Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male a year old; you shall take it from the sheep or from the goats; and you shall keep it until the fourteenth day of this month, when the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill their lambs in the evening. Then they shall take some of the blood, and put it on the two doorposts and the lintel of the houses in which they eat them. They shall eat the flesh that night, roasted; with unleavened bread and bitter herbs they shall eat it. Do not eat any of it raw or boiled with water, but roasted, its head with its legs and its inner parts. And you shall let none of it remain until the morning, anything that remains until the morning you shall burn. In this manner you shall eat it: your loins girded, your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and you shall eat it in haste. It is the Lord’s Passover. For I will pass through the land of Egypt that night, and I will strike all the first-born in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and on all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgments: I am the Lord. The blood shall be a sign for you, upon the houses where you are; and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and no plague shall fall upon you to destroy you, when I strike the land of Egypt.
“This day shall be for you a memorial day, and you shall keep it as a feast to the Lord; throughout your generations you shall observe it as an ordinance for ever. Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread; on the first day you shall put away leaven out of your houses, for if any one eats what is leavened, from the first day until the seventh day, that person shall be cut off from Israel.”
Reflection
Freedom comes at a price, for as the Letter to Hebrews tells us, “without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness of sins” (9:22). God is bringing about a great work of reconciliation, not simply freeing the Israelites from sin but restoring their right relationship with him. Just before the Lord is to exact his final judgment on the gods of Egypt with the death of the firstborn son, we read about the institution of the feasts of Unleavened Bread and Passover.
The Lord begins by reorienting time for the Israelites. Just as the first Sunday of Advent marks the beginning of a new liturgical year in the life of the Catholic Church, the springtime month of Abib, later called Nisan, is to mark the new beginning of the year for the Israelites. The annual feasts, which recall the wonders of the Lord, are to organize their way of life as a people and to be passed on.
The feast of Unleavened Bread begins with the Passover on the first day, extends through the rest of the week, and culminates in a final feast. The feast of Unleavened Bread commemorates the rushed nature of the Israelites’ departure from Egypt, which did not allow enough time for dough to rise. The feast of Passover recalls the Lord’s judgment on the Egyptian gods, while destroyer angels pass over the marked homes of the Israelites, who have been set apart. Even before the events occur, the people are offered rites by which to remember their fulfillment and to protect their loved ones and neighbors from harm.
The Jewish feasts are prefigurements of Jesus Christ, who fulfills and transforms them. The Last Supper, the final meal that our Lord shared with his disciples before his Passion, takes the form of a new Passover. “Now as they were eating, Jesus took bread and blessed, and broke it, and gave it to the disciples and said, “Take, eat; this is my body.” And he took a chalice, and when he had given thanks he gave it to them, saying, “Drink of it, all of you; for this is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins” (Matthew 26:26-28). Christ is the high priest who offers the sacrifice. Christ is the perfect, unblemished, sacrificial lamb who is offered on the Cross. His body, blood, soul, and divinity are poured out for us in the Most Holy Eucharist.
The Passover rite was a matter of life, death, and communion for the Israelites, and was to be performed with great care. The blood which they spread on their doorposts was a sign of faith in the God of Israel’s power to save them, and which protected them from the destroying hand of his angels. If one were to partake of the passover lamb unworthily or to consume leavened bread against the commands of the Lord and the teaching of Moses, they were to be “cut off from the congregation of Israel.”
Brothers, the cares and routines of life and work can numb us from the realities of our faith. Our practices of prayer and asceticism have the power to deliver us into a greater awareness of the truths we confess, allowing us to experience the fruit of their effects in our lives. Our reception of the Lord’s body, blood, soul, and divinity marks the doorposts of our bodies and souls with the blood of Christ, and protects us from the destroyer. As the Israelites heeded the instructions of the Lord through Moses, let’s renew our commitment to receiving the Eucharist worthily and strive to confess our sins in the Sacrament of Confession at least once per month, and whenever we need to confess mortal sins. Mortal sins are serious sins that destroy the life of grace in our souls and make us unworthy of participating in the Eucharist.
While the rites of the Old Testament and those of the Catholic Church can seem strict, they are offered to us out of love in order to protect us from harm and make us fruitful for God’s kingdom. The Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, which is the fulfillment and transformation of the Passover meal, is the true worship for which the Lord fought to deliver his people. It can become the means of liberation for us, cleansing us with the blood of the lamb and nourishing us with his flesh. Through the Eucharist, we become one with Christ, enabling him to transform us from within so that we begin to live with his divine life within us.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, you commemorated and symbolized the deliverance of your people, Israel, from a small enemy—Pharaoh and Egypt—through a ritual meal, the Passover, marked by the sprinkling of blood and the sacrifice of a Paschal lamb. You fulfilled that symbol in a far greater deliverance from a far greater enemy. You delivered each of us from the greatest enemy—sin and death—through the ritual meal of your own Son’s body and blood, the ultimate Paschal Lamb, who gave himself out of love for us. The old symbol was surpassed by a new symbol containing the fullness of divine love, which alone can redeem, for it enters into our imprisonment, slavery, sin, and death, and delivers us from within. It transforms everything into love, as even life and death become communion in the divine love you reveal to us in your Son, Jesus Christ. Help us to enter into this day more fully through a deeper knowledge of your great love for us, as we live out the new freedom you have won for us in your Son. We make this prayer in his name, Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Waiting for the Lord
Exodus 12:29-42





Brothers, welcome to Day 24 of Exodus 90.
On this Wednesday, we fast and abstain from meat to unite ourselves to Jesus in honor of his betrayal by one of his disciples. These acts of penance should express our love that approaches Jesus in friendship, seeking to make up for all the times we have betrayed him through our sins.
We also remember today the feast of St. Thomas Aquinas, one of the greatest scholars and teachers in Christian history. Though known for the brilliance of his writing, he is a saint because of his great purity and devotion, which led him to write moving praise for Jesus’s presence in the Blessed Sacrament. We strive to imitate his virtues in our daily meditation and battle against those things that distract us from following the Lord in purity of heart.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Wait for the Lord to come in silence, allowing him to lead you to freedom. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
At midnight the Lord struck all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the first-born of Pharaoh who sat on his throne to the first-born of the captive who was in the dungeon, and all the first-born of the cattle. And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a house where one was not dead. And he summoned Moses and Aaron by night, and said, “Rise up, go forth from among my people, both you and the sons of Israel; and go, serve the Lord, as you have said. Take your flocks and your herds, as you have said, and be gone; and bless me also!”
And the Egyptians were urgent with the people, to send them out of the land in haste; for they said, “We are all dead men.” So the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneading bowls being bound up in their mantles on their shoulders. The sons of Israel had also done as Moses told them, for they had asked of the Egyptians jewelry of silver and of gold, and clothing; and the Lord had given the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they let them have what they asked. Thus they despoiled the Egyptians. And the sons of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand men on foot, besides women and children. A mixed multitude also went up with them, and very many cattle, both flocks and herds. And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they had brought out of Egypt, for it was not leavened, because they were thrust out of Egypt and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any provisions. The time that the sons of Israel dwelt in Egypt was four hundred and thirty years. And at the end of four hundred and thirty years, on that very day, all the hosts of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt. It was a night of watching by the Lord, to bring them out of the land of Egypt; so this same night is a night of watching kept to the Lord by all the sons of Israel throughout their generations.
Reflection
The consequence of sin is death, as we see going back to the Garden of Eden. In response to Pharaoh’s continued disobedience, the final plague is delivered, and the firstborn son of Egypt is taken. A great cry of mourning is heard throughout the land of Egypt.
Admitting the defeat of his gods, Pharaoh hits rock bottom, no longer able to resist God and putting his nation at Israel’s disposal. After four hundred years in slavery, the Egyptians beg them to leave. The Israelites plunder the Egyptians in unlikely fashion: by simply asking for their silver, gold, and fine clothing. Those held in bondage despoil those who had held them captive for generations, making up for years of lost wages. The Egyptians will give up anything for them to leave, and for their suffering to come to an end. Rock bottom moments, which many of us have experienced before, are like this.
There is a tension between readiness, waiting, and action in the Passover, which is instructive for us. The instructions of the Lord are clear: “In this manner you shall eat it: your loins girded, your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and you shall eat it in haste. It is the Lord’s Passover.” There is time enough for the Passover rite to be performed the night before, but not enough of the dough to rise in the morning. While the Lord’s angels exact their judgments on the firstborn sons of Egypt, the Israelites are to watch through the night and be ready to move.
It’s normal for people today to do whatever they want whenever they please. When careful planning of a course of action is involved, they will follow conventional wisdom, conforming to other people’s expectations and what everyone typically does. It’s uncommon to involve the Lord in our decision-making, seeking his wisdom for the circumstances we face in the course of our day.
This dynamic, of waiting upon the Lord to lead, should not paralyze us. It’s meant to involve the Lord in the process of making decisions, and, when the time comes for action, to have confidence following what we believe the Lord is asking of us. Consider this example: a good father recognizes his son’s desire to please him and affirms him even if the son doesn’t always know the best way to do this. In fact, though there are times when pure obedience to a direction is essential, especially in youth, a good father wants to see his son begin to venture for himself as he matures. Does anything make a father prouder than to see a son act manfully upon his best judgment? So with us. If we have sought wisdom from the Lord, and the path forward is unclear, but a time of action has come, we need to re-learn a healthy confidence in making decisions, trusting the gifts and light that the Lord has breathed into us.
We will know the quality of our decisions by their fruit. If in the trail of a decision we find joy, peace, and love, we can be confident that we have made the right decision. If we find discord and division, we have another decision to make: an amendment, and to take a different path forward. Like the Israelites, we too need to offer our sacrifices, wait for the Lord to lead us, and be ready to move with haste.
After more than four hundred years in slavery, the time has come for the Israelites to go free. Six hundred thousand men implies a full number of about two million people when you include women and children. Notice how such a mass of people is said to have no provisions for their journey. No food, drink, or shelter as they begin their journey away from civilization into the desert.
And yet, they are looked after by the Lord, safe and secure as they venture into the elements. “It was a night of watching by the Lord, to bring them out of the land of Egypt; so this same night is a night of watching kept to the Lord by all the sons of Israel throughout their generations.” Throughout our Exodus, we keep watch through our practice of prayer. We are becoming contemplatives first, which means that our first move is increasingly towards silence, allowing the Lord to influence our minds and hearts, and to see the world with his vision.
When we rise in the morning, when we pause from activity during the day, or when we rise at night to pray, we act as God’s watchmen and respond to the God who has watched over us first and watches over us at every moment. Sometimes the fruits of our prayers are obvious, but at other moments, prayer can feel like we are wasting our time. It’s important to drop our judgments on the quality of our prayer, especially as they begin to deepen, because we do not know how the Lord is using that time according to his purposes for us and for the accomplishment of his will for the world. What matters is that we persevere in prayer and consistently take the time to respond to God, who is always watching over, protecting, and providing for us as he was for Israel.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, thank you for calling us your sons and for making us so. Thank you for helping us to trust in you and to bring you into all of our decisions, so that we may live with you and in relationship with you each day. Thank you for showing us through the Exodus how you sustain your people, even miraculously, as you led so many through the desert. Although we tend to trust our own logic a little too much, please infuse our logic with your logic. Please infuse all of our actions with your love. As we seek you now in the silence we have set aside for reflection and prayer, help us to settle our hearts, to hear your voice, and to walk with you. Teach us to place our trust in you throughout each and every day. We make this prayer through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Remembrance
Exodus 13:1-5; 17-22





Brothers, welcome to Day 25 of Exodus 90.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Remember all that the Lord has given you and done for your good today. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
The Lord said to Moses, “Consecrate to me all the first-born; whatever is the first to open the womb among the sons of Israel, both of man and of beast, is mine.”
And Moses said to the people, “Remember this day, in which you came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage, for by strength of hand the Lord brought you out from this place; no leavened bread shall be eaten. This day you are to go forth, in the month of Abib. And when the Lord brings you into the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he swore to your fathers to give you, a land flowing with milk and honey, you shall keep this service in this month.”
When Pharaoh let the people go, God did not lead them by way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, “Lest the people repent when they see war, and return to Egypt.” But God led the people round by the way of the wilderness toward the Red Sea. And the sons of Israel went up out of the land of Egypt equipped for battle. And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him; for Joseph had solemnly sworn the sons of Israel, saying, “God will visit you; then you must carry my bones with you from here.” And they moved on from Succoth, and encamped at Etham, on the edge of the wilderness. And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of cloud to lead them along the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, that they might travel by day and by night; the pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night did not depart from before the people.
Reflection
The whole of the Exodus can be understood as a great process of remembering. Israel must come back to the God who formed them and has now come to rescue them. They must remember their identity as God’s chosen people and the mission he has given them. The Passover meal as a moment of deliverance will serve as an essential reference for all generations. Simply the sight of healthy sons should be enough for the Israelites to recall the life given to them during the Exodus.
Because the Lord spared the lives of the firstborn sons of the Israelites, he commands Moses to consecrate them, which means to be set apart for his purpose. The nature of this consecration is not specified, but many consider this to mean that the eldest son was designated for worship, performing liturgical ministries in the sanctuary and offering sacrifices. In the Book of Numbers, which we will read starting on Ash Wednesday, the tribe of Levi is chosen as a substitute for the office that formerly belonged to the firstborn son. We will explore why they lost it later on.
The Israelites take an unlikely path. They don’t take a direct route to Canaan, the Promised Land flowing with milk and honey, which was guarded by Egyptian military forts. Fearing that war would discourage his people to abandon their deliverance and return to Egypt, and in order to fulfill the promise that his people would worship him at Mt. Sinai, the Lord instead leads them into the wilderness toward the Red Sea, straight into a dead end.
They march as though for battle, and they remember the bones of Joseph, the son of Jacob, who was sold into slavery in Egypt and was at the origin of their arrival in Egypt hundreds of years ago. He promised them that the Lord would visit them, and asked them to carry his bones when he does. They remember their father and fulfill his word today.
They not only have Moses to lead them, but a pillar of cloud to guide them by day and a pillar of fire by night. The pillar travels ahead of the mass of millions of Israelites and leads them day and night. Throughout Church history, the pillar has been interpreted as the presence of the Holy Spirit, who guides the faithful as a pillar.
As they depart, Moses calls his people to remembrance. “Remember this day, in which you came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage, for by strength of hand the Lord brought you out from this place.” The Lord has worked many marvels, turning water to blood, light to darkness, skin to boils, has sent frogs, gnats, flies, and locusts, and even taken the firstborn son of the Egyptians. As they venture further from the life they knew and the comforts they enjoyed, even while oppressed, it will be easy to forget what the Lord has done. Is it not the same with us?
As we go about our day, we reflexively recall many things, some that happened a long time ago. Remembrance is challenging for a few reasons. Our memory can hold onto past moments that were difficult, especially those that were charged with emotional intensity. Our memory easily warps from truth, even unintentionally, the farther we get from original events. In old age, our capacity to remember can decline altogether.
As we use screens more intentionally, and we limit the number of impressions upon our imaginations in our return to reality, it’s not uncommon for our memories to become more active. We remember things we haven’t thought of in years, which can be both consoling and, at other moments, more challenging. It’s important to receive these memories as they come so that we can process them into our lives, entrusting them to the Lord for his guidance, and seeking the counsel of our brothers and trusted guides as we need to.
Like the Israelites, we are venturing farther and farther away from the life we lived before we began this journey. The difference between where we are today and where we were when we began is different for every man. We all need to remember why we committed and what prompted our Exodus only a few short weeks ago. We must hold fast to why we began. And we need to take time to reflect upon and articulate the many personal marvels the Lord has worked in our own histories. Remember, remember this day.
When times become more challenging, we can rely upon our remembrance of the Lord’s strong arm and upon the pillars he provides for us. May the Holy Spirit come upon our minds and hearts and inspire our remembrance.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, thank you for bringing us on this particular journey of Exodus 90 in 2026. Thank you for the great journey of our spiritual life—that is, our whole life—and especially for helping us to live it more explicitly in your presence. Thank you also for all the moments of our lives, even those that have not been the most virtuous. We trust that you work all things for the good, even as memories of the past arise and different thoughts and emotions surface in our minds and hearts. Please radiate everything with your light and your love. Help us to see how you are always present and how you continue to work everything for the good, as we surrender our lives to you and follow your Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. We make this prayer in his name. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Sonship or Death
Exodus 14:5-18, 21-26





Brothers, welcome to Day 26 of Exodus 90.
Today is Friday, a day of penance in honor of Jesus’s Passion and Death. The Cross and Resurrection have become the definitive Exodus from sin and death, as the blood and water from Jesus’s pierced side have flowed over to cleanse us from sin and to impart the Holy Spirit upon us as sons of the Father. Our fasting and abstinence from meat today become signs of our freedom from the world as we seek to live for what is above, offering ourselves together with Jesus out of love and obedience to the Father.
We would also ask for your prayers for Joe Weinkopf, one of our brothers, who died unexpectedly on January 16. Joe was 19 years old, and a sophomore at Thomas Aquinas College, a member of the class of 2028. He spent his final evening before the Blessed Sacrament and died peacefully in his sleep.
As we continue our Exodus, we remember our brother Joe in our prayers and sacrifices. We pray for the repose of his soul, for his family as they mourn, and for all Exodus men who have passed on to the true Promised Land.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Embrace the gift of sonship today that saves you from eternal death. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
When the king of Egypt was told that the people had fled, the mind of Pharaoh and his servants was changed toward the people, and they said, “What is this we have done, that we have let Israel go from serving us?” So he made ready his chariot and took his army with him, and took six hundred picked chariots and all the other chariots of Egypt with officers over all of them. And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt and he pursued the sons of Israel as they went forth defiantly. The Egyptians pursued them, all Pharaoh’s horses and chariots and his horsemen and his army, and overtook them encamped at the sea, by Pihahiroth, in front of Baal-zephon.
When Pharaoh drew near, the sons of Israel lifted up their eyes, and behold, the Egyptians were marching after them; and they were in great fear. And the sons of Israel cried out to the Lord; and they said to Moses, “Is it because there are no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness? What have you done to us, in bringing us out of Egypt? Is not this what we said to you in Egypt, “Let us alone and let us serve the Egyptians’? For it would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.”
And Moses said to the people, “Fear not, stand firm, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will work for you today; for the Egyptians whom you see today, you shall never see again. The Lord will fight for you, and you have only to be still.” The Lord said to Moses, “Why do you cry to me? Tell the sons of Israel to go forward. Lift up your rod, and stretch out your hand over the sea and divide it, that the sons of Israel may go on dry ground through the sea. And I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians so that they shall go in after them, and I will get glory over Pharaoh and all his host, his chariots, and his horsemen. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I have gotten glory over Pharaoh, his chariots, and his horsemen.”
Then Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the Lord drove the sea back by a strong east wind all night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided. And the sons of Israel went into the midst of the sea on dry ground, the waters being a wall to them on their right hand and on their left. The Egyptians pursued, and went in after them into the midst of the sea, all Pharaoh’s horses, his chariots, and his horsemen. And in the morning watch the Lord in the pillar of fire and of cloud looked down upon the host of the Egyptians, and discomfited the host of the Egyptians, clogging their chariot wheels so that they drove heavily; and the Egyptians said, “Let us flee from before Israel; for the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians.”
Then the Lord said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the sea, that the water may come back upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.”
Reflection
No gesture could show God’s saving power and fatherly care more than snatching his people from sudden death. The pillar of cloud and fire leads the people of Israel by an unlikely route, and they encamp by the banks of the Red Sea in an area hemmed in by a defensive canal and reedy lakes. Pharaoh hears of this and believes the Israelites to be trapped by the geography of the land. Despite the countless sufferings he has brought upon Egypt, Pharaoh reverses course and changes his mind once again. “What is this we have done, that we have let Israel go from serving us?” He recklessly sends his chariots and charioteers after the Israelites, still not having learned the lesson that the Lord of Israel is the true sovereign of the world.
God’s own people also need to continue learning his identity as savior, for they do not remember what the Lord has done for them. As they see the chariots approaching in the distance, they faithlessly cry to the Lord, give themselves over to fear, and rebuke Moses with darkness: “Is it because there are no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness? . . . For it would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.”
The cry and fear of the Israelites express a message that’s recognizable. It reveals the state of their minds and hearts and the despair from which they’ve grown accustomed. They believe the choice is between slavery in Egypt or death by Pharaoh, and confess that they would rather live without true life than risk to venture with the Lord into the wilderness. Their cry expresses something important: our sins settle for less, and are plainly conformist. The adventure into originality, which men crave today, is actually becoming who God created us to be. Sinners have more in common than the saints.
Does not this cry of despair ring in our time? Does it not emerge from within us from time to time as well? Why all this effort and energy for spiritual exercises? Why not go back to former ways when things were good enough? We can recall the life of the old man in us, and believe that we are missing out as we attempt to live differently now. And when we look out at those who live in the ways we left behind or would want to live if we could, we doubt whether or not we’ve made the right choice to follow God into the wilderness. But, brothers, the Israelites are wrong. The choice is not between slavery in Egypt or death by Pharaoh, but between sonship or death. Will we live as sons of the Father or suffer the death of living half-alive apart from our identity in Christ?
In the face of the fear and doubt of his people, and under the threat of danger, we see the holiness and greatness of Moses beginning to shine. He confronts their fear and exhorts them to trust in the Lord: “Fear not, stand firm, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will work for you today; for the Egyptians whom you see today, you shall never see again. The Lord will fight for you, and you have only to be still.”
Notice something very important: though Moses has spoken these words to the people, he has not prayed to the Lord to deliver them. And yet the Scripture says that the Lord answers Moses anyway, which is to say that the Lord hears the longing of Moses’s heart and comes to the aid of his chosen man in need of a miracle. St. Gregory of Nyssa remarks on this divine assistance: “The Scripture teaches us that the voice which is melodious and ascends to God’s hearing is not the cry made with the organs of speech, but the meditation sent up from a pure conscience” (Life of Moses, 82). The Lord sees, and he knows Moses’s heart, and then the Lord works his mightiest act of deliverance.
With their backs against the wall, the waters part before their eyes. The Israelites pass through the sea as though walking on dry ground while walls of water surround them on both sides. Imagine what this was like. When the Egyptians follow after them, the waters collapse upon them as the Lord wins glory. The people believe in the Lord and in Moses.
The Lord becomes our Father when we walk through the waters of baptism, as the people of Israel walked through the waters of the Red Sea. Our baptism alters us indelibly. We become sons of the Father, brothers of our Master, and temples of the Holy Spirit. We become priests, prophets, and kings in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The Lord has fought for us in baptism, and he will fight for us today. My brothers, “Fear not, stand firm, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will work for you today. . . . The Lord will fight for you, and you have only to be still.”
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, you have led us into a journey that is challenging and at times uncomfortable. We find ourselves grasping inside for things from the past that were more comfortable. We start to fear what this journey might mean or where it might take us. Yet you have already given us the gift of sonship through baptism. We long to live that gift, freed from the slavery of Egypt and moving away from the death offered by Pharaoh. We step into the life and freedom of the sonship you give us in Jesus Christ. Help us to live that sonship fully today. Help us to begin anew by remembering why we began this journey and the promise that moves us forward. We recommit ourselves to you this day, as we make this prayer through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Song of Deliverance
Exodus 14:30-31; 15:1-14, 18





Brothers, welcome to Day 27 of Exodus 90.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Praise the Lord for saving you from sin and death today. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Thus the Lord saved Israel that day from the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the seashore. And Israel saw the great work which the Lord did against the Egyptians, and the people feared the Lord; and they believed in the Lord and in his servant Moses.
Then Moses and the sons of Israel sang this song to the Lord, saying, “I will sing to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider he has thrown into the sea. The Lord is my strength and my song, and he has become my salvation; this is my God, and I will praise him, my father’s God, and I will exalt him. The Lord is a man of war; the Lord is his name.
“Pharaoh’s chariots and his host he cast into the sea; and his picked officers are sunk in the Red Sea. The floods cover them; they went down into the depths like a stone. Your right hand, O Lord, glorious in power, your right hand, O Lord, shatters the enemy. In the greatness of your majesty you overthrow your adversaries; you send forth your fury, it consumes them like stubble. At the blast of your nostrils the waters piled up, the floods stood up in a heap; the deeps congealed in the heart of the sea. The enemy said, ‘I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my desire shall have its fill of them. I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.’ You blew with your wind, the sea covered them; they sank as lead in the mighty waters. “Who is like you, O Lord, among the gods? Who is like you, majestic in holiness, terrible in glorious deeds, doing wonders? You stretched out your right hand, the earth swallowed them.
“You have led in your merciful love the people whom you have redeemed, you have guided them by your strength to your holy abode.
The Lord will reign for ever and ever.”
Reflection
Praise offers the most fitting response to God’s great work of deliverance. It acknowledges him as God and expresses our thanksgiving and awe before his infinite power. The song we read today is the first of many songs recorded in the Bible. The song is broken up into two parts. The beginning reflects upon the mighty wonder the Lord has just worked, and the second anticipates the future conquest of God’s people in the Promised Land.
Song is the fitting response to the greatness of the Lord. Our Blessed Mother Mary responds to the announcement that she has conceived by the power of the Holy Spirit: “My soul proclaims the greatness of the Lord. My spirit rejoices in God my Savior.” Moses also rejoices before the deliverance of his people: “I will sing to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider he has thrown into the sea. The Lord is my strength and my song, and he has become my salvation.” And we read of Miriam, the sister of Moses and Aaron, who was the same brave girl who retrieved Moses from the daughter of Pharaoh by the Nile all those years ago. Timbrel in hand, she dances and sings. The Lord, who brought Moses forth from the waters of the Nile, has now fetched his whole people from the waters of the Red Sea.
Origen, the early Church Father from the third century, notes that the Egyptians are said to sink like “lead” because they are consumed by the “bitter and fluid desire of present things” (Exodus Homily VI). The saints, meanwhile, walk with levity upon the water because they are not weighed down by the encumbrances of the world.
The lead we carry in our lives, our sins and attachments to sin, require purification. They are purified through the fires of temptation so that in time our lead can give way to pure gold. Oftentimes, our temptations discourage and embarrass us; sometimes, we even mistake our temptations for sins. The Desert Fathers, who lived shortly after Origen in the third and fourth centuries, help to adjust our view of temptation and to see it properly. For instance, “When Cyrus of Alexandria was asked about the temptation of lust, he said, ‘If you are not tempted, you have no hope; if you are not tempted, it is because you are sinning. The man who does not fight sin at the stage of temptation is sinning already in his body. The man who is sinning in his flesh has no trouble from temptation.’”
Temptations, then, are signs that we are in the fight and that we are not lost. Rather than discouraging us, they should encourage us, as challenging as they may be, to face and overcome with God’s help and the encouragement of others.
There’s another saying about a young monk who thinks he’s got temptations mastered. St. Macarius, who was considered like a god in the desert while he lived, offers him fraternal correction:
“When he was alone with him, Macarius asked the younger monk, ‘How are things going with you?’ Theopemptus replied, ‘Thanks to your prayers, all is well.’ The old man asked, ‘Do you not have to battle with your fantasies?’ He answered, ‘No, up to now all is well.’ He was afraid to admit anything. But the old man said to him, ‘I have lived for many years as an ascetic and everyone sings my praises, but despite my age, I still have trouble with sexual fantasies.’ Theopemptus said, ‘Well, it is the same with me, to tell the truth.’ And the old man went on admitting, one by one, all the other fantasies that caused him to struggle, until he had brought Theopemtpus to admit all of them himself.”
Through the disarming power of vulnerability, this great Desert Father corrects his younger brother and wins him for God.
Origen also reflects upon the verse towards the end of Moses’s song, which reads: “Who is like you, O Lord, among the gods? Who is like you, majestic in holiness, terrible in glorious deeds, doing wonders?” Commentaries often note “the gods” to refer to the many gods the Lord overthrows through the Plagues, which we have considered. Origen, though, seeking a deeper spiritual meaning, believes the verse to reference the saints, “those gods who by grace and participation in God are called gods” (Exodus Homily VI). He notes other verses in the Bible that reference these gods: “I said, ‘You are gods,’” and again, “God has stood in the congregation of the gods” (Psalm 82). And he references as well John’s first letter, which reads, “little children we do not yet know what we shall be; but if he has been reveled to us we shall be like him” (1 John 3:2).”
The saints are not gods in substance, which is to say they are not invisible, incorporeal, immutable, uncreated yet creating like the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: “No one is like you, O Lord, among the gods.” The saints, through the purifying fires of temptation and transformed by the power of grace, become gods through participation in the inner life of God, partaking in the divine nature (2 Peter 1:4).
Our journey is long, and today’s song of victory comes as relief with the struggles we have endured and the struggles we will face in future days. May we rejoice today with Moses, Aaron, and Miriam by reflecting upon the height, breadth, and depth of the calling we have received in Christ. As we discipline our ears by listening to music that lifts our souls to God and forsaking those that drag us down to earth, may we also give voice to the new, unique, unrepeatable song the Lord is singing in each one of us.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, help us to understand all the things that are happening within us as we experience various desires, sometimes with embarrassment and a desire to hide them. Give us the freedom of the Desert Fathers, who humbly accepted the limitations of their humanity. Give us the wisdom of those who are able to look at their desires and understand that they are connected to deeper realities—sometimes wounds, sometimes needs, sometimes past experiences—and infuse all of them with your grace. Transform us from within so that our desires may move toward holier and holier desires, as we come in touch with our deepest longing, which is for eternal communion with you. We make this prayer through your Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.The Beatitudes
Matthew 5:1-12





Brothers, welcome to Day 28 of Exodus 90.
Today, we honor the Lord’s Day by going to church and observing the whole day as one of rest and leisure. This day reminds us that God has freed us from slavery to the world, enabling us to dedicate time to the things that matter most. This is a day to remember the Lord’s victory in his glorious Resurrection and the peace that he has won for us. Enjoy this day with family and friends, celebrating through a festive meal and uplifting recreation and leisure.
Today is also traditionally known as Septuagesima Sunday, the beginning of a preparatory period leading up to Lent. Septuagesima means “seventy,” a symbolic number that points to extending the forty days to encompass a gradual build-up to Lent. The whole concept of Exodus 90 as ninety days of prayer and asceticism before Easter points to the importance of spiritual preparation and anticipation of the greatest feasts. The Church in her wisdom calls us to prepare our hearts for the great purification that we must seek in the Lenten season as we enter the desert with Christ.
We are grateful to welcome back our spiritual guide, Fr. Boniface Hicks, who will lead us in this Sunday’s reflection.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Imitate the Lord and his virtues to be blessed today. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Holy Gospel according to Matthew
Seeing the crowds, he went up on the mountain, and when he sat down his disciples came to him. And he opened his mouth and taught them, saying: “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God. Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are you when men revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account. Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven, for so men persecuted the prophets who were before you.”
Reflection
The first four beatitudes correspond to the four great idols. In his teaching, St. Thomas Aquinas warns us about four good things in life that can take the place of God: money, honor, power, and pleasure.
Each of these things is good. They are not evil in themselves, but they exert a powerful pull because they promise fulfillment in this life. If you have enough money, you have everything. If you have enough honor, you have everything. If you have enough power, you have everything. If you have enough pleasure, you have everything. Each contains a small taste of heaven, and it can seem that if we just had enough of them, we would have heaven under our control. For that reason, each of these can easily become an idol.
There is a wonderful moment in an interview between Jordan Peterson and Arthur Brooks in which Brooks does something with Peterson that he often does with his students at Harvard Business School, where he teaches about happiness. He asks Peterson to identify his dominant idol by pinpointing his greatest temptation. It is a helpful exercise and worthy of our own reflection: what is my primary temptation—money, honor, power, or pleasure?
Arthur Brooks suggests working through them in reverse order. Which is least tempting to me? Which is least likely to become an idol? In other words, as long as I had a normal amount of it, I would be satisfied.
Because these are all goods, we might assume that we simply want a normal amount of each: a normal amount of money, honor, power, and pleasure. But which one is most in danger of becoming an idol? In their interview, both men identified honor as their greatest temptation. They could do without more money, power, or pleasure, but doing without more honor would be more difficult.
How does this correspond to the first four beatitudes? Jesus says, “Blessed are the poor,” adding “in spirit.” The opposite of poverty, of course, is money. The second beatitude is, “Blessed are those who mourn.” We usually associate mourning with the loss of a loved one, but the Greek term is more closely connected to repentance. St. Leo the Great notes that the only thing truly worthy of our mourning is that which God does not will. Ultimately, what God does not will is sin. What we should mourn, then, is our sin. To have our sin exposed would be a loss of honor. One way we try to preserve honor is by pretending that we never sin. Never mourning our sin, never admitting failure, and propping up a false image of ourselves—this is the danger of the idol of honor.
“Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the land.” Meekness stands in opposition to power. It is an unfortunate word in English, because meekness does not mean weakness. The virtue being described is the mean in anger—not wimpiness, not aggressiveness, but a properly controlled anger. This is what the tradition understands by meekness.
Finally, pleasure stands opposed to “Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness.” When we hunger and thirst, by definition, we do not have enough pleasure.
If we briefly consider the dangers of each idol, we can see how they affect us personally. Take money. Money invites easy comparison. I can think myself better than another because I have more. If I had the most money, I would be the best. It also offers a sense of security: if I have enough money, nothing bad can happen to me. I can protect myself against anything.
Money also brings influence. Those with more money often have more influence. The temptation is to believe that if I had more money, I would matter more. The opposite of this idol is not simply having less money, but embracing poverty of spirit—not bolstering my worth through income, but treasuring the true riches, which are the kingdom of heaven. “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for the kingdom of heaven is theirs.” That is the remedy: fixing our eyes on the kingdom of heaven, where money has no value.
With honor, the opposite is mourning. When we refuse to admit our failures, mourn our sins, or repent of our transgressions—when we try to look better in order to gain honor from others—we fall into what the Desert Fathers called vainglory, and what we commonly call vanity. Vanity is emptiness. It is a falseness, a refusal to live in the reality of our limitations.
Our limitations are not ugly or unlovable. This is the master move of St. Thérèse, who speaks of limitations as littleness. The most limited creature—the one with no honor at all—is a helpless baby, and we find that lovable. That kind of lovable limitation is what we call littleness. Littleness, along with mourning our sins and acknowledging our failures, helps free us from the idol of honor.
Many of us can say honestly that at this point in Exodus, we have not done everything perfectly. There is a temptation to want others to think that we are doing all of this flawlessly. But honor is relinquished when we allow ourselves to be seen as we are, without pretense, simply repenting of the ways we fall short of what Christ calls us to.
The idol of power is rooted in control—controlling people, situations, outcomes. We imagine that with enough power, everything would go the way we want. Sometimes this shows up as aggression. Sometimes it appears as passive aggression—neglecting responsibilities, withholding affection, speaking with sarcasm or cynicism. There are many ways of grasping at control, including ambition and careful plotting to gain influence over others.
Finally, pleasure. “Blessed are those who hunger and thirst.” Exodus invites us into this beatitude in very concrete ways. It tempers the temptation toward pleasure: less sweet food and drink, less meat, less food overall, a little less warmth in the shower. These small deprivations help keep the idol of pleasure at bay.
Pleasure also extends to entertainment—shows, sports, distractions—and to sexual pleasure. For those who are married, there is no prohibition against intimacy with one’s spouse during Exodus. At the same time, there is a real danger in excess, in using others for pleasure, or in constantly seeking stimulation through food, taste, touch, and sensory thrills.
These four idols are corrected by the first four beatitudes. As personal purification takes place—and Exodus is a tremendous help in this—we are freed to move forward into the remaining beatitudes: showing mercy, seeking purity of heart so that we may see God, and becoming peacemakers, called sons of God.
Even persecution, when it comes, can only take away money, honor, power, and pleasure. If we are free of those idols, we can endure persecution and know that we are truly blessed, like the saints who have gone before us.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, help us to grow in freedom from the four great idols of money, honor, power, and pleasure. Help us to receive the great blessing of your love, the Beatitudes, by which we receive the Kingdom of God and inherit the land. In them, we find true comfort and the satisfaction of our hunger and thirst. Through them, we are able to receive mercy, to see you, and to know our true identity as sons of God. We make this prayer in the name of your Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Bitter Waters
Exodus 15:22-27





Brothers, welcome to Day 29 of Exodus 90.
We now enter week five of Exodus 90 as we travel with the Israelites through the desert. Without abundant water or food, the wilderness serves as a place of trust and dependence in which the spiritual battle comes to the forefront. We must rely on God every day in prayer, finding living water and heavenly nourishment for our journey to freedom.
Today is also the feast of the Presentation, commemorating Jesus’s redemption as a firstborn son. At the culmination of the ten plagues, God claimed all the firstborn sons of Israel for himself, to be sacred and consecrated to him. We now see that this special role of belonging to God reflected God’s eternally begotten Son, the firstborn of all creation. In our baptism, we were adopted as sons in the Son and share in the privileges of Jesus’s own inheritance of God’s divine and eternal life. To honor the feast today, relax one of your ascetical disciplines!
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Bring any bitterness within you before the Lord today that he may heal it. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Then Moses led Israel onward from the Red Sea, and they went into the wilderness of Shur; they went three days in the wilderness and found no water. When they came to Marah, they could not drink the water of Marah because it was bitter; therefore it was named Marah. And the people murmured against Moses, saying, “What shall we drink?” And he cried to the Lord; and the Lord showed him a tree, and he threw it into the water, and the water became sweet. There the Lord made for them a statute and an ordinance and there he tested them, saying, “If you will diligently listen to the voice of the Lord your God, and do that which is right in his eyes, and give heed to his commandments and keep all his statutes, I will put none of the diseases upon you which I put upon the Egyptians; for I am the Lord, your healer.” Then they came to Elim, where there were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees; and they encamped there by the water.
Reflection
Freed from slavery, the people of Israel are on the move after they cross the sea and enter the wilderness, a place of testing. They travel southwest into the Sinai Peninsula. Though they have seen wonders, they remain thirsty, as if they are unsatisfied with what God has done for them. The people of Israel test God and complain against him and his messenger.
Moses cries to the Lord for help, and the Lord comes to his aid, showing himself to be a loving father to his quarrelsome children. He shows Moses a tree to place in the bitter water, which turns the water sweet. The Lord then brings them to the twelve springs of Elim under the cool of the seventy palm trees. The Church Fathers reflect upon these interesting events to see the tree as a foreshadowing of the Cross of Christ. The Cross makes the bitter commands of Law and the Old Testament sweet, because Jesus fulfills them and invites us into life in the Holy Spirit. And the refreshment of Elim is like the teaching of the twelve apostles and the seventy teachers that go before the Lord to prepare his way in the Gospel of Luke.
Jesus, our Master, says, “out of the fullness of the heart the mouth speaks” (Luke 6:45). The bitter waters of Marah reflect the inner bitterness that the Israelites carry within themselves. The low-voiced groans of the Israelites reveal their lack of trust in the Lord despite all the wonders he has worked before their eyes.
Bishop Erik Varden reflects on the problem of murmuring in an entire chapter of his book, Entering the Twofold Mystery. Having just rejoiced, he explains, “the people, still with Red Sea mud on their feet, soon changed their tune. . . . When faced with present suffering . . . when the journey through the desert, begun joyfully, makes them thirsty, they abandon their supernatural outlook. . . . Marah water will for all time symbolize murmuring, which leaves a foul taste in the mouth, cannot quench thirst and suffocates hope.” (93). This is a perennial problem, a rebellion still very much alive today. “For what is sin, if not a lack of faith and trust, the presumption of assuming that God cannot, will not, reach or help us?” (94).
Is not our time dominated by bitter speech? Most commentary today is powered by sarcasm, cynicism, and judgment in the world, and maybe even more in the Church.
The sin of sarcasm bitterly says the opposite of what is meant. The word sarcasm comes from the Greek word sarkazein, which literally means to “tear flesh apart.”
Cynicism, another sin of speech, takes a negative outlook on life by assuming the absolute worst of other people’s intentions and believing everyone to be motivated by self-interest.
No matter how dominant in our time, both sarcasm and cynicism are forms of judgment, which our Master plainly condemns, saying, “Do not judge.”
Taking our Master at his word, the Desert Fathers believed judgment to be God’s domain alone, and therefore they practiced what’s called non-judgment toward others. Now, that term does not ring well in our ear today, because it often smacks of relativism. Even though at the outset non-judgment can sound soft, unmanly, and perhaps even untruthful, the reality is far from it.
Moses the Black was a giant of a man. He was a former desert robber who, after his conversion by the inspiration of the witness of Christian monks, became one of the greatest saints of the Egyptian desert. Perhaps because of the sins of his own checkered past, he was known for his non-judgment. Here are two short sayings of his and one remarkable story.
First, Moses said, “The monk must die to his neighbor and never judge him at all in any way whatever.”
And another of his sayings is, “If you are occupied with your own faults, you have no time to see those of your neighbor.”
And now for the story: “A brother at Scetis committed a fault. A council was called to which Abba Moses was invited, but he refused to go to it. Then the priest sent someone to say to him, ‘Come, for everyone is waiting for you.’ So he got up and went. He took a leaking jug, filled it with water and carried it with him. The others came out to meet him and said to him, ‘What is this, Father?’ The old man said to them, ‘My sins run out behind me, and I do not see them, and today I am coming to judge the errors of another.’ When they heard that, they called off the meeting and said no more to the brother but forgave him.”
Israel does not need to fall into this sorry state of murmuring, for the Lord provides them with the remedy for their malady. He tells them to listen diligently to his word and to obey his commands. If they do, he promises that they will not suffer what the Egyptians suffered. And then declares to them a new, moving name for himself: “For I am the Lord, your healer.”
This verse jumps off the page against the backdrop of where we have been in the plagues, and for what’s to come at Mount Sinai. The theme of healing will be a place of focus for us during the second half of our Challenge as Lent begins on Ash Wednesday. Today, I invite you to spend time with this beautiful name in prayer today: “For I am the Lord, your healer.”
On this feast of the Presentation, as we present ourselves to the Lord as his sons with Jesus, may we listen more attentively to the words of the Lord in Sacred Scriptures and in our prayer. The Lord, our Healer, will heal our wounds and turn our bitterness sweet.
Becoming men who say what they mean with sincerity and practicing non-judgment of our neighbor is so far from weakness. Rather, it’s one of the highest forms of self-mastery. This is why the Sayings of the Desert Fathers on self-control are not dominated by lust, but about how we speak. The murmurings of the Israelites are far from over, which shows how hard it is to live this way, as we well know from our own experience.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, heal our hearts and cleanse our lips, that we may use our mouths only for the building up of one another. Purify us of our judgments. Help us not to give in to cynicism and sarcasm. Rather, with great awareness of our own sinfulness, help us to look upon one another with compassion and to learn to have compassion upon ourselves as well. We ask this in the name of Jesus, our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Bread from Heaven
Exodus 16:1-8, 31, 35; 17:1-2, 4-7





Brothers, welcome to Day 30 of Exodus 90.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Allow the Lord to satisfy the deepest desires of your heart today for love and peace. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
They set out from Elim, and all the congregation of the sons of Israel came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after they had departed from the land of Egypt. And the whole congregation of the sons of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness, and said to them, “Would that we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the fleshpots and ate bread to the full; for you have brought us out into this wilderness to kill this whole assembly with hunger.”
Then the Lord said to Moses, “Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather a day’s portion every day, that I may test them, whether they will walk in my law or not. On the sixth day, when they prepare what they bring in, it will be twice as much as they gather daily.” So Moses and Aaron said to all the sons of Israel, “At evening you shall know that it was the Lord who brought you out of the land of Egypt, and in the morning you shall see the glory of the Lord, because he has heard your murmurings against the Lord. For what are we, that you murmur against us?” And Moses said, “When the Lord gives you in the evening flesh to eat and in the morning bread to the full, because the Lord has heard your murmurings which you murmur against him—what are we? Your murmurings are not against us but against the Lord.”
Now the house of Israel called its name manna; it was like coriander seed, white, and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey. And the sons of Israel ate the manna forty years, till they came to a habitable land; they ate the manna, till they came to the border of the land of Canaan.
All the congregation of the sons of Israel moved on from the wilderness of Sin by stages, according to the commandment of the Lord, and camped at Rephidim; but there was no water for the people to drink. Therefore the people found fault with Moses, and said, “Give us water to drink.” So Moses cried to the Lord, “What shall I do with this people? They are almost ready to stone me.” And the Lord said to Moses, “Pass on before the people, taking with you some of the elders of Israel; and take in your hand the rod with which you struck the Nile, and go. Behold, I will stand before you there on the rock at Horeb; and you shall strike the rock, and water shall come out of it, that the people may drink.” And Moses did so, in the sight of the elders of Israel. And he called the name of the place Massah and Meribah, because of the fault-finding of the sons of Israel, and because they put the Lord to the test by saying, “Is the Lord among us or not?”
Reflection
God provides for all his people’s needs. The waters of the sea parted, the bitter waters of Marah were sweetened, and the people of Israel have been refreshed by the springs of Elim. From the moment the Lord called Moses, through all the wonders he worked in Egypt, the Lord has been close to his people. He knows their condition, and he has proved his presence many times, perhaps especially in the constant appearance of the pillar of cloud and fire, which they can see with their own eyes and which leads them day by day.
But, as they venture further from Egypt, and as they experience their natural needs for hunger and thirst, they long for the life of slavery, for, though burdening, at least it met their basic needs for food and drink. Their fundamental longings put the Lord to the test fundamentally: “Is the Lord among us or not?” This doubt is dark and disturbing. The people of Israel have seen the Lord work wonders unknown to man, and yet, they do not believe that he can provide for their basic daily necessities.
The Lord generously responds to their doubts with bread from heaven to satisfy their hunger, and water from the rock to quench their thirst. The people of Israel awaken to new Manna every morning. Each man, big and small, gathers according to his need, and his needs are satisfied. On the sixth day, they are to gather twice as much so that it provides enough for the following day of rest. With the same food, the Lord responds generously to the proportion of every man’s desire.
Our Master takes up this passage in his teaching in the synagogue in Capernaum: “Truly, truly, I say to you, he who believes has eternal life. I am the bread of life. This is the bread which comes down from heaven, that a many may eat of it and not die. I am the living bread which came down from heaven; if any one eats of this bread, he will live for ever; and the bread which I shall give for the life of the world is my flesh” (John 6:48-51).
Our hearts are designed for desire. Unlike many misconceptions about the faith, life with Christ is not about running away from our desires, but understanding, embracing, and trusting in the Lord to satisfy them in human and divine ways. We have all experienced the disappointment of getting what we thought we wanted, and then being left longing for still more, or for something else altogether. We got into the school, got the degree, landed the job, married the girl, bought the house, paid it off, saved for retirement, and then only to face questions like, “So what? What for? When does it stop?”
Knit into every man is a longing for the infinite, which only God can satisfy. Fortunately for us, just like the Father notices the longing of the people of Israel for bread and then meets that desire differently for each man according to his need in the Manna, he satisfies the longings of the human heart for eternity with himself in the Eucharist. He responds to our God-shaped hole with the true bread from heaven: Jesus’s body, blood, soul, and divinity.
The way in which God provides for his people is instructive. It’s not enough to gather once and live off of forever. He provides daily for his people. It’s not like winning the lottery, but like showing up for work. Our Master reminds us of this truth in our most central prayer, the Our Father: “Our Father, who art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come, thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day, our daily bread.”
This daily dynamic is true for us as we provide for others, especially those closest to us. It’s not enough to express our love for our spouse, or to affirm our sons and daughters once, monthly, or weekly. These gestures are to be renewed daily and as consistently as the Lord provides manna for his people. As we make our Exodus, may we embrace the desires of our hearts and learn to see how the Lord is providing for them each day. And receiving our daily nourishment from the Lord, may we turn to provide for those entrusted to our care in a new way today.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, thank you for placing desire within our hearts—a desire for the infinite, a desire for you. This desire is touched and spurred on by our desire for the things of this life, from our daily bread to daily successes, to connections in love, to good things pleasing to the eye and sweet to the taste. We have many desires. Help us not to make an idol out of any of these material ways of fulfilling those desires, but always to let our desire open more and more to you. Let us not substitute you with money or honor or power or pleasure, but through each of those good things, come to desire you even more. We make this prayer through Christ our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.Rely on the Brotherhood
Exodus 17:8-13; 18:5, 13-24





Brothers, welcome to Day 31 of Exodus 90.
On this Wednesday, we approach the Lord with sacrificial love, offering our fasting and abstinence from meat in reparation for sin and for those we love. We remember our “why” in this quest for freedom that entails dying to ourselves so that we might truly live with Christ.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Let us remember that we are in the loving presence of God, who is with us. Renew your commitment to your brothers in the Lord today. Take one minute of silence now, praying for God’s blessing on you, your family, fraternity, and all Exodus Men.
Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.
A Reading from the Book of Exodus
Then came Amalek and fought with Israel at Rephidim. And Moses said to Joshua, “Choose for us men, and go out, fight with Amalek; tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in my hand.” So Joshua did as Moses told him, and fought with Amalek; and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill. Whenever Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed; and whenever he lowered his hand, Amalek prevailed. But Moses’ hands grew weary; so they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat upon it, and Aaron and Hur held up his hands, one on one side, and the other on the other side; so his hands were steady until the going down of the sun. And Joshua mowed down Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.
And Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, came with his sons and his wife to Moses in the wilderness where he was encamped at the mountain of God.
The next day Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood about Moses from morning till evening. When Moses’ father-in-law saw all that he was doing for the people, he said, “What is this that you are doing for the people? Why do you sit alone, and all the people stand about you from morning till evening?” And Moses said to his father-in-law, “Because the people come to me to inquire of God; when they have a dispute, they come to me and I decide between a man and his neighbor, and I make them know the statutes of God and his decisions.” Moses’ father-in-law said to him, “What you are doing is not good. You and the people with you will wear yourselves out, for the thing is too heavy for you; you are not able to perform it alone. Listen now to my voice; I will give you counsel, and God be with you! You shall represent the people before God, and bring their cases to God; and you shall teach them the statutes and the decisions, and make them know the way in which they must walk and what they must do. Moreover choose able men from all the people, such as fear God, men who are trustworthy and who hate a bribe; and place such men over the people as rulers of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens. And let them judge the people at all times; every great matter they shall bring to you, but any small matter they shall decide themselves; so it will be easier for you, and they will bear the burden with you. If you do this, and God so commands you, then you will be able to endure, and all this people also will go to their place in peace.” So Moses gave heed to the voice of his father-in-law and did all that he had said.
Reflection
Freedom often means individualism in people’s minds. On the contrary, there are no self-sufficient human beings, and the more we try to figure things out on our own, the more we are left in the lurch. Israel, likewise, thought they should be able to have and do all that was necessary in the desert, but their rather pathetic whines and groans speak of their weakness. Today, we see that the people of Israel are capable of much when they rely on God’s help. The Lord nourishes his people with bread from heaven and water from the rock. They are made ready for battle with Amalek, who led a nomadic tribe that wandered the Sinai peninsula.
While Joshua, whose name means the Lord is salvation, chooses men for his army and leads them into battle, Moses takes up his priestly role on the top of the hill. While Moses’s hands are raised holding his wonder-rod, the Israelites prevail over the Amalekites. When he lowers them through fatigue, they suffer loss. Realizing this dynamic, Aaron and Hur have Moses sit upon a rock, and they steady his hands themselves until nightfall. The Israelites triumph!
Shortly thereafter, Moses’s father-in-law, Jethro, returns with his wife Zipporah and his sons Gershom and Eliezer. Moses shows Jethro great respect. Moses recounts the wonders of the Lord; he has delivered on the promises that sent him forth from Midian. Jethro was a priest of Midian and likely shared in the polytheism of Near Eastern belief. He comes to believe in the one, true God of Israel: “Now I know that the Lord is greater than all gods, because he delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians, when they dealt arrogantly with them.”
The following day, Jehtro sees Moses judging over every dispute from morning until evening. He offers fraternal correction to the mighty deliverer of God’s people, who remains his son-in-law: “What you are doing is not good. You and the people with you will wear yourselves out, for the thing is too heavy for you; you are not able to perform it alone.” He counsels Moses to select men to judge over small decisions concerning a smaller number of his people, while leaving only the hard cases for Moses to handle himself. Moses listens and does exactly what he suggests.
In the beginning of Exodus, we saw how Moses resisted his call and asked the Lord to send someone else. Though disappointed in his lack of trust, the Lord accommodates for Moses by sending his brother Aaron to become his spokesman. Moses has become great in the sight of all, and yet today we see the importance of other men in Moses's life. He needs Joshua to lead his army, and Aaron and Hur to hold up his hands in order for them to win. And Moses needs Jethro to speak the truth into the unbearable burden that Moses had placed upon himself.
Jethro takes the risk to make a correction, which he concludes by saying: “If you do this, and God so commands you, then you will be able to endure, and all this people also will go to their place in peace.” As exceptional as Jethro’s correction was, even more so was Moses’s simple acceptance and response. He didn’t defend himself, he didn’t rely on his credentials, or tell Jethro the wonders that God was obviously working through him. Instead, we see the humility of this great man. He saw in Jethro an image of God the Father who was correcting him through his father-in-law. Moses listened, and all the people looking to Moses for leadership were given peace.
We all have personal calls that are not given to anyone else, and which demand our personal response. The lie is that we need to respond to our calls alone. It’s in isolation that we become susceptible to the promises of the world, the temptations of our flesh, and the empty show of the devil. In fellowship with other men, we are given the necessary support to bear the callings we receive from the Lord. This is why our fraternities are so important. We give to our brothers, and we receive from them, and this fraternity brings victory for those we lead.
Let us pray.
Heavenly Father, thank you for giving us brothers with whom to make this journey—our Exodus from the modern-day Pharaohs who hold us in bondage—so that we might find greater freedom to worship and adore you, to serve you, and to find rest in you. Thank you for the brothers who accompany us, who lift up our hands, and who help us in the battle. Thank you for the brothers who offer us guidance, and even correction, to help us travel more faithfully and more peacefully toward you. Be with us and be with our brothers throughout this day. Sustain us in our journey and bring us home to freedom in you. Thank you for our one true and greatest brother, who makes all fraternity possible, Jesus Christ. We make this prayer in his name, Jesus Our Lord. Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.